[^425]: Great Lent: Third Sunday of Lent (Liturgy Antiphon 3 Concluded, Basil Liturgy, Mid-Week Rubrics of Fourth Week) and Fourth Sunday of Lent (Saint John of the Ladder) Opening (§§ 40 Concluded, 41, 42 Opening). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p731 (printed page 716) and facing English leaf p732 (printed page 717). Liturgy of the Third Sunday (Veneration of the Cross): Paragraph 40 concludes the Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great on the Third Sunday of Lent: The Third Antiphon is chanted with the Dismissal Troparion of the Cross ("Save, O Lord, Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance...", Sōson Kyrie ton laon sou) as the festal refrain to Psalm verses 98:5, 27:9a, and 27:9b (LXX). After the Little Entrance, the Dismissal Troparia are chanted: the Resurrection Troparion, "Save, O Lord, Thy people...", and the Patron Saint of the Church, followed by the Kontakion "To Thee, the Champion Leader" (Tē hypermachō). Instead of the Trisagion Hymn, the Choirs chant the ancient Cross hymn: "Thy Cross we worship, O Master, and Thy holy Resurrection we glorify!" (Ton Stavron sou proskynoumen, Despota). Epistle pericope: Hebrews 4:14–5:6; Gospel pericope: Mark 8:34–9:1. Communion Hymn: "The light of Thy countenance was marked upon us, O Lord!" (Ps. 4:7 LXX [Ps. 4:6 MT]). Instead of "We have seen the true Light", "Save, O Lord, Thy people..." is sung, and the Dismissal is pronounced. Mid-Week Rubrics of the Fourth Week: On Sunday evening, Penitential Vespers follows Paragraph 31. On Monday, Wednesday, and Friday of the Fourth Week, at the First Hour, instead of "Order my steps in Thy word" (Ps. 118:133 LXX), the Choirs chant "Thy Cross we worship, O Master...", and the Kontakion of the Cross: "No longer does the fiery sword guard the gate of Eden..." (Ouketi phloginē romphaia) is recited. At the Ninth Hour, the Beatitudes [Makarismoi] are chanted as usual. In Wednesday Vespers (Mid-Fast / Mesonēstismos), at "Glory... Both now and ever...", the Idiomelon "Today He Who is unapproachable in essence..." (Sēmeron ho aprositos tē ousia) is chanted. Saturday of the Fourth Week follows Paragraph 34 (Soul Saturday memorial order). Fourth Sunday of Great Lent (Commemoration of Saint John of the Ladder): Paragraph 41 codifies Great Vespers on Saturday evening: At "Lord, I have cried" (Ps. 140 LXX), ten Stichera: six Resurrection Stichera from the Octoechos and four Prosomia of Saint John from the Triodion; "Glory...": Doxastikon of the Saint; "Both now and ever...": first Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone. At the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichera; "Glory...": Doxastikon of the Saint; "Both now and ever...": "O marvelous wonder transcending all the ancient miracles! For who has ever known a mother bear without a man..." (Ō thaumatos kainou). Dismissal Troparia: the Resurrection Troparion, the Dismissal Troparion of Saint John: "Dweller of the desert and angel in the body..." (Tais tōn dakryōn sou rhoais), the Dismissal Theotokion, and Dismissal. Paragraph 42 opens Sunday Matins: Following Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadica ("It is truly meet to glorify Thee, the Word of God..."), the Dismissal Troparion of Saint John, and the Six Psalms. Note [*]: In what appears to have been an editorial oversight, Violakis indicates "Thy pure icon we venerate, O Good One..." (Tēn achranton eikona sou) as the Dismissal Troparion, whereas the correct Dismissal Troparion is "Save, O Lord, Thy people..." (Sōson Kyrie ton laon sou).

[^426]: Great Lent: Fourth Sunday of Lent (Saint John of the Ladder) Matins Concluded and Divine Liturgy, and Wednesday of the Fifth Week Opening (§§ 42 Concluded, 43, 44 Opening). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p733 (printed page 718) and facing English leaf p734 (printed page 719). Fourth Sunday Matins Concluded: Paragraph 42 concludes Matins: At "God is the Lord", the Dismissal Troparia as at Vespers; the appointed Kathismata of the Psalter and the Amomos (Kathisma 17, Psalm 118 LXX); the Resurrection Kathismata, Evlogitaria, Hypakoe, Hymns of Ascent [Anavathmoi] of the Tone, and Resurrection Prokimenon. Canons: the Resurrection Canon of the Octoechos, the Canon of the Triodion ("I have become like the prodigal son, O Christ...", Hōmoiōthēn Christe) with refrain "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee", and the Canon of Saint John with refrain "Holy father John, pray to God for us". After Ode 3, the Kontakion of the Saint, followed by his Kathisma and Theotokion from the Triodion; after Ode 6, the Resurrection Kontakion and Oikos of the Tone, the Menologion from the Menaion, and the Memorial [Hypomnema] of the Triodion for Saint John of the Ladder (author of The Ladder of Divine Ascent). The Katavasiai: "I shall open my mouth, and it shall be filled with the Spirit..." (Anoixō to stoma mou); the complete order of the Resurrection Matins Gospel for Sundays of the Triodion; after "More honorable than the Cherubim", the Resurrection Exaposteilarion, the Exaposteilarion of Saint John ("O venerable John of perpetual memory..."), and the Theotokion. At the Praises (Lauds), eight Stichera: four Resurrection Stichera and four Stichera of Saint John from Vespers, with Psalm verses 111:1 LXX ("Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord...") and 115:6 LXX ("Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints...") preceding the final two Stichera; "Glory...": Doxastikon of the Saint: "Come, let us work in the mystical vineyard..." (Deute ergasōmetha en tō mystikō ampelōni); "Both now and ever...": "Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos..."; Great Doxology, and "Today salvation is come unto the world" (Sēmeron sōtēria). Fourth Sunday Divine Liturgy: Paragraph 43 codifies the Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great: Typika and the Beatitudes [Makarismoi] of the Tone for four, and four Troparia from Ode 6 of the Canon of Saint John from the Triodion. After the Little Entrance: the Resurrection Dismissal Troparion, that of Saint John, that of the Patron Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "To Thee, the Champion Leader". Epistle pericope: Hebrews 6:13–20; Gospel pericope: Mark 9:17–31 (Healing of the Boy with a Mute Spirit). Communion Hymn: "Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the highest. Alleluia" (Ps. 148:1 LXX); "We have seen the true Light", and Dismissal. Vespers on Sunday evening follows Paragraph 31. Wednesday of the Fifth Week Opening: Paragraph 44 opens Vespers of the Presanctified: After the Eighteenth Kathisma of the Psalter ("Unto the Lord in my distress I cried...", Pss. 119–133 LXX), at "Lord, I have cried" (Ps. 140 LXX)... Note [*]: If the Fourth Sunday of Lent falls on March 30 (the feast day of Saint John in the Menaion), the Memorial of the Triodion is omitted in favor of the Synaxarion of the Menaion.

[^427]: Great Lent: Wednesday of the Fifth Week (Presanctified Liturgy, Great Canon at Compline) and Thursday Matins Opening (§§ 44 Concluded, 45, 46 Opening). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p735 (printed page 720) and facing English leaf p736 (printed page 721). Wednesday Presanctified Liturgy: Paragraph 44 concludes the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts on the fifth Wednesday of Lent: At "Lord, I have cried" (Ps. 140 LXX), the Choirs begin chanting from verse 10: "The sinners shall fall into their own net, whilst that I withal escape" (Ps. 140:10 LXX [Ps. 141:10 MT]), singing the Idiomelon "Falling among thieves of my own lustful thoughts..." (Tois tōn emōn logismōn) twice, the Martyrikon once, three Prosomia from the Triodion, and all twenty-four alphabetical Stichera from the Great Canon of Saint Andrew of Crete. Little Entrance with the censer, "O Gladsome Light", the two Old Testament Readings of the day from Genesis (Gen. 17:1–9 LXX) and Proverbs (Prov. 17:17–18:5 LXX), "Let my prayer arise in Thy sight as incense" (Ps. 140:2 LXX), and the rest of the Presanctified Liturgy in regular order. The Great Canon with Compline: Paragraph 45 details the ancient monastic order of chanting the Great Canon of Saint Andrew of Crete at Small Compline on Wednesday evening: After "It is truly meet", the Great Canon is chanted with the penitential refrain: "Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!" (Eleēson me ho Theos eleēson me). After Ode 6, the Kontakion "My soul, my soul, arise! Why sleepest thou? The end is drawing near, and thou shalt be confounded..." (Psychē mou, psychē mou, anasta) is chanted slowly in Tone 6; subsequently Odes 7, 8, and 9 are sung, concluding with the Heirmos "Ineffable is the childbearing of a seedless conception..." (Asporou syllēpseōs). The Trisagion Prayers, the Kontakion "My soul, my soul, arise!", "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), the Prayer of the Hours: "Thou Who at all times and at every hour..." (Ho en panti kairō), "More honorable than the Cherubim", the priestly blessing "May God be merciful unto us...", the Supplicatory Prayer to the Mother of God by Paul the Monk of Evergetis: "O spotless, undefiled, incorrupt, unblemished, pure Virgin..." (Aspile, amolynte), the Prayer of Antiochus the Monk to Christ: "And grant unto us, Master, as we depart unto sleep, rest of body and soul..." (Kai dos hēmin, Despota), "O most glorious Ever-Virgin...", "The Father is my hope...", "All my hope I place in thee...", the Dismissal, the Litany of Mutual Forgiveness ("Let us pray for the peace of the world..."), and "Through the prayers of our holy fathers...". Thursday Matins Opening: Paragraph 46 opens the Matins service: Following the Midnight Office and the Six Psalms, "Alleluia" is chanted 12 times with verses in the Tone of the week, followed by the Triadika of the Tone from the Horologion. After the First Stichologia of the Psalter, the Penitential Kathismata of the Octoechos; after the Second Stichologia, the Kathismata found after Ode 3 of the Triodion Canon. Psalm 50, "Save, O God, Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance...", and the Nine Biblical Odes are chanted verse by verse (see Paragraph 18). Then Odes 1 and 3 of the Canon of the Saint of the day from the Menaion with their Heirmos, the Small Litany, and the Kathisma of the Saint with its Theotokion...

[^428]: Great Lent: Thursday of the Fifth Week Matins Concluded, Thursday Vespers, and The Great Canon with Matins Opening (§§ 46 Concluded, 47, 48 Opening). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p737 (printed page 722) and facing English leaf p738 (printed page 723). Thursday Matins Concluded: Paragraph 46 concludes Thursday Matins: The Triodia of Ode 4 from the Triodion, Odes 5 and 6 of the Canon from the Menaion, the Heirmos and Small Litany, the Kontakion and Oikos of the Triodion, the Menologion and Memorial [Hypomnema] of the Triodion; then the Troparia of the Beatitudes [Makarismoi] with the refrain: "Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!". Subsequently, the Triodia of Odes 8 and 9, "Let us praise, bless, and worship the Lord", and the Heirmos "Him Whom the heavenly hosts glorify..." (Hon stratiai ouranōn doxazousi). After "More honorable than the Cherubim", the Heirmos "Ineffable is the childbearing of a seedless conception..." (Asporou syllēpseōs), "It is truly meet", the Exaposteilarion, the Small Doxology: "To Thee belongs glory" (Soi doxa prepei, read), "Let us complete our morning prayer unto the Lord", the Idiomela of the Aposticha twice, the Martyrikon once, "Glory... Both now and ever...": Theotokion, "It is good to confess unto the Lord" (Ps. 91:2 LXX), the Trisagion Prayers, "Standing in the temple of Thy glory...", "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), "Blessed is He Who is, Christ our God...", "O Heavenly King...", three great prostrations with the Prayer of Saint Ephrem the Syrian, and the Hours in regular order with the Kontakion "My soul, my soul, arise!" in each Hour. In the Ninth Hour, the Beatitudes are chanted; after the Trisagion Prayers, the Prayer "All-holy Trinity...", and Dismissal. Thursday Vespers and Presanctified Liturgy: Paragraph 47 codifies Thursday Vespers: Introductory Psalm (Ps. 103 LXX), Eighteenth Kathisma of the Psalter (Pss. 119–133 LXX); at "Lord, I have cried" (Ps. 140 LXX), the Idiomelon "Having willingly stripped myself of the divinely woven garment..." (Autexousiōs exedythēn) twice, the Martyrikon once, three Prosomia from the Triodion, and four from the Menaion; "Glory... Both now and ever...": Stavrotheotokion. Little Entrance with the censer, "O Gladsome Light", the two Old Testament Readings of the day from Genesis (Gen. 18:20–33 LXX) and Proverbs (Prov. 18:10–19:4 LXX), "Let my prayer arise", and the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts is celebrated. The Great Canon with Matins Opening: Paragraph 48 details the solemn rubrical order for Matins when the Great Canon of Saint Andrew of Crete is chanted in its entirety: The Priest proclaims the blessing: "Blessed is our God..."; after "O Heavenly King", the Trisagion Prayers, "Lord, have mercy" (12 times), "O come, let us worship...", and the Royal Psalms [Psalms 19 and 20 LXX]: "The Lord hear thee in the day of affliction..." (Ps. 19:2 LXX), during which the Priest solemnly censes around the entire church with the hand-censer or Katzion. Trisagion Prayers, "Save, O Lord, Thy people...", and the Six Psalms. "Alleluia" 12 times with verses in the Tone of the week, and the Triadika with their special concluding petitions: at the first verse: "By the intercessions of the Holy Apostles...", at the second verse: "By the intercessions of the Hierarch [Saint Nicholas]...", and at the third verse: "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos...". Footnote 29: In parish and cathedral practice, this solemn service of the Great Canon is often celebrated on Wednesday evening around the First Hour of the night (7 P.M.), or early Thursday morning, as is also done with the Akathist Hymn on the Fifth Saturday.

[^429]: Great Lent: Thursday of the Fifth Week: The Great Canon with Matins Concluded (§ 48 Concluded). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p739 (printed page 724) and facing English leaf p740 (printed page 725). The Great Canon with Matins Concluded: Paragraph 48 concludes the solemn celebration of the Great Canon of Saint Andrew of Crete: The appointed Kathisma of the Psalter (which, on account of the great length of the service, is usually omitted and read in the morning before the Hours; see Footnote 30), the Small Litany, the Apostolic Kathismata of the Tone, Psalm 50, and the Great Canon begins, reciting before each Troparion (except the Heirmos) the refrain: "Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!" (Eleēson me ho Theos eleēson me). After Ode 3, the Heirmos "Establish, O Lord, my unstable heart upon the rock of Thy commandments..." (Stereōson, Kyrie), the Small Litany, and three Kathismata from the Triodion; then the Second Choir begins the Triodia for ten with the refrain "Holy Apostles of Christ, intercede for us!" (Apostoloi tou Christou, presveusate hyper hēmōn). In continuation, Odes 4, 5, and 6 of the Great Canon, concluding with the Heirmos "I cried with my whole heart unto the merciful God, and He heard me from the lowest depths of Hades, and raised up my life from corruption!" (Evoēsa en holē tē kardia mou). The Small Litany, the Kontakion "My soul, my soul, arise! Why sleepest thou? The end is drawing near, and thou shalt be confounded; awake then, and be watchful, that Christ God may spare thee, Who is everywhere present and fillest all things" (Psychē mou, psychē mou, anasta), the Oikos, the Menologion of the day from the Menaion, and the Memorial [Hypomnema] of the Triodion recounting how Saint Andrew, Archbishop of Crete, composed this monumental hymn of compunction, and how the life of Saint Mary of Egypt is set forth as an archetype of repentance. The Second Choir begins the Beatitudes [Makarismoi]: "In Thy Kingdom remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest into Thy Kingdom" with the penitential Troparia of the thief: "Thou didst make the thief a citizen of Paradise...". Odes 7, 8, and 9 of the Great Canon and the Triodia are chanted in sequence. At Ode 8, instead of "Glory...", "We bless Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord!" is sung, and after "Both now and ever...", "We praise, bless, and worship the Lord, singing and exalting Him unto all ages!". Heirmos of Ode 8: "Him Whom the heavenly hosts glorify...", Small Litany, and "The Theotokos and Mother of the Light, let us magnify in hymns!". Ode 9 concludes with the Heirmos "Ineffable is the childbearing of a seedless conception..." (Asporou syllēpseōs), Small Litany, and the Exaposteilarion is read. Small Doxology ("To Thee belongs glory", read), "Let us complete our morning prayer unto the Lord", the Aposticha of the Praises (Lauds), "It is good to confess unto the Lord" (Ps. 91:2 LXX), the Trisagion Prayers, "Lord, have mercy" (12 times), "O Heavenly King, strengthen our rulers...", three great prostrations with the Prayer of Saint Ephrem the Syrian, and the Dismissal is given. In the morning, following the designated Kathisma of the Psalter, the Hours are read in standard non-penitential form, followed by Vespers and the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts. Footnote 31: While reciting "Lord, have mercy" 12 times has become customary practice (as noted in the Typikon of Constantine and for Holy Week Matins), the canonical order requires after the Trisagion Prayers: "Standing in the temple of Thy glory, we seem to stand in heaven...", "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), "More honorable than the Cherubim", "Blessed is He Who is, Christ our God...", and "O Heavenly King..." (see Paragraph 18).
