[^180]: Concurrence of the Feast of the Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple with a Sunday (Violakis, pp. 226–227, November 21, §§ 8–10). Physical leaf p241 (printed page 226) and facing English leaf p242 (printed page 227) begin Cohort 25 by concluding § 7 of the feast (the Little Entrance, Eucharistic lections, Megalynarion, and Communion Verse) from Cohort 24, and providing the full rubrical order for when November 21 coincides with a Sunday (§§ 8–10). At Saturday Great Vespers (§ 8), 4 Resurrection Stichira and 6 of the feast are sung at "Lord, I have cried", followed at "Glory; Both now and ever" by the festal Doxastikon, the Entrance with the censer, and the three Old Testament readings (Exodus 40:1–5, 9–10, 16, 34–35; 1 Kings 8:1, 3–7, 9–11; Ezekiel 43:27–44:4). At Sunday Matins (§ 9), following the Polyeleos, the Kathismata are distributed across three stichologia: at the First Stichologia, 2 Resurrection Kathismata and the festal Kathisma *Δικαίων ὁ καρπός* ("The fruit of the righteous"); at the Second Stichologia, 2 Resurrection Kathismata and *Δαβὶδ προοδοποίησον* ("David, prepare the way"); and at the Third Stichologia, two festal Kathismata (*Πρὸ συλλήψεως ἁγνή* and *Δαβὶδ ὁ προπάτωρ*). The Matins Gospel is Luke 1:39–49, 56 (*Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ*), followed by *Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ θεασάμενοι* and Psalm 50 LXX. At the canons, the Resurrection Canon is joined with the two festal canons; after Ode 3, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos are recited, followed by the festal Kathisma (Violakis notes an editorial erratum in the printed Greek text mentioning "two Kathismata", whereas the Menaion appoints a single Kathisma chanted twice); after Ode 6, the festal Kontakion and Ikos are sung with the Synaxarion; and at Ode 9, the festal Megalynaria are chanted with the Katavasia *Μυστήριον ξένον* ("A strange and wonderful mystery"). At the Praises, 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the feast are sung, with the festal Doxastikon *Σήμερον τῷ Ναῷ προσάγεται* ("Today into the Temple is brought") at "Glory".

[^181]: Sunday after the Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple (Violakis, pp. 228–229, November 21–24 Afterfeast, §§ 11–13). When a Sunday falls during the Afterfeast of the Entrance (November 22–24), the rubrics govern the union of the Sunday Resurrectional office with the Afterfeast propers. At Saturday Great Vespers (§ 11), 6 Resurrection Stichira are combined with 4 Afterfeast Stichira from the Menaion series at "Lord, I have cried"; at "Glory", the festal Doxastikon is chanted, and at "Both now and ever", the First Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone. At Sunday Matins (§ 12), the Psalter stichologia assigns the Resurrection Kathismata, with the Afterfeast Kathismata substituting for the usual Theotokia; the canons combine the Resurrection Canon with the Second Canon of the feast; after Ode 3, the Afterfeast Kathisma is chanted; after Ode 6, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos are sung with the Menaion Synaxarion; and the Katavasiai of the Nativity (*Χριστὸς γεννᾶται* / "Christ is born, give ye glory") are chanted, followed by the normal Sunday Morning Gospel sequence. At the Praises, 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Afterfeast Stichira are sung, followed at "Glory" by the Sunday Eothinon Doxastikon. At the Divine Liturgy (§ 13), the Beatitudes assign 4 to the Tone and 4 to Ode 6 of the festal canon; the Epistle and Gospel are of the Sunday; and the Communion Verse is Psalm 148:1 LXX (*Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν* / "Praise the Lord from the heavens").

[^182]: Apodosis of the Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos, Commemoration of the Great-Martyrs Catherine and Mercurius, Sunday Concurrence, and the Nativity Pre-festal Kontakion Rubric (Violakis, pp. 228–233, November 25, §§ 14–19). November 25 celebrates the Apodosis (concluding leave-taking) of the Entrance of the Theotokos, joined with the commemoration of the Holy Great-Martyr Catherine of Alexandria and the Holy Great-Martyr Mercurius. On a weekday (§§ 14–16), Great Vespers appoints 3 Prosomoia of the feast (*Σήμερον πιστοὶ χορεύσωμεν*) and 3 of Saint Catherine at "Lord, I have cried"; at Matins, both canons of the feast and the canon of the Saint are chanted, with the Ninth Ode sung with the festal Megalynaria; and at the Divine Liturgy, the proper Festal Antiphons are sung, with the Epistle (Galatians 3:23–4:5) and Gospel (Mark 5:24–34) of Saint Catherine. When November 25 coincides with a Sunday (§§ 17–19), Saturday Great Vespers assigns 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the feast, and 3 of the Saint; at Sunday Matins, the stichologia Kathismata combine the Resurrection Kathismata with those of the feast (substituting for the Theotokia), and at the Praises, 4 Resurrection Stichira are joined with 4 of the Saint, with the festal Doxastikon *Σήμερον τῷ Ναῷ προσάγεται* at "Glory". At the Divine Liturgy (§ 19), the Festal Antiphons are sung with the Sunday refrain *Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν* at the Second Antiphon, and the Epistle of Saint Catherine is joined with the Sunday Gospel. Most significantly, an overarching rubrical note at the conclusion of § 19 establishes that following the Apodosis of the Entrance, on the very next Sunday or feast day, the Church commences chanting the Forefeast Kontakion of the Nativity of Christ: *Ἡ παρθένος σήμερον τὸν προαιώνιον Λόγον* ("Today the Virgin cometh to the cave to give birth ineffably to the Pre-eternal Word").

[^183]: Feast of the Holy Apostle Andrew the First-Called: Weekday Typikon (Violakis, pp. 232–235, November 30, §§ 1–3). The feast of Saint Andrew the First-Called is celebrated with full festal solemnity on November 30. At Great Vespers on a weekday (§ 1), following the First Stasis of the Psalter (*Blessed is the man*, Pss. 1–3 LXX), 3 Prosomoia are doubled to 6 at "Lord, I have cried" (*Ὁ τῷ Προδρόμου φωτὶ μεμορφωμένος*), followed at "Glory" by *Τὴν τῶν ἰχθύων ἄγραν* and at "Both now and ever" by the Nativity Forefeast Theotokion *Ἡσαΐα χόρευε* ("Rejoice, O Isaiah"); three Old Testament composite readings drawn from the Catholic Epistles of Saint Peter (1 Peter 1:1–2:6; 2:11–24; 3:8–4:11) are read; and the Aposticha conclude with "Glory" (*Τὸν συναίμονα Πέτρου* / "The kinsman of Peter") and the Forefeast Theotokion *Ἰωσὴφ εἰπὲ ἡμῖν* ("Joseph, tell us"). At Matins (§ 2), after the Polyeleos and the First Antiphon of Tone 4, the Prokeimenon is Psalm 18:5 LXX (*Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν ἐξῆλθεν ὁ φθόγγος αὐτῶν* / "Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth"), and the Gospel is Matthew 4:18–23 (the calling of Peter and Andrew by the Sea of Galilee). Three canons are chanted: the Canon of the Theotokos, the Menaion Canon, and the Apostle's Canon composed by Saint John Damascene (*Τὴν τεθολωμένην μου ψυχήν*); the Katavasiai are *Χριστὸς γεννᾶται*; and at the Praises, 4 Prosomoia (*Βηθσαϊδὰ νῦν ἀγάλλου*) are sung, concluding at "Glory" with *Τὸν κήρυκα τῆς πίστεως* and at "Both now and ever" with the Forefeast Theotokion *Ὑπόδεξαι Βηθλεέμ* ("Receive, O Bethlehem"). At the Divine Liturgy (§ 3), the Beatitudes take 4 from Ode 3 of the first canon and 4 from Ode 6 of the second canon; the lections are Epistle: 1 Corinthians 4:9–16 (pericope 131) and Gospel: John 1:35–51 (pericope 4, the First-Called Apostle following the Lamb of God); and the Communion Verse is Psalm 18:5 LXX.

[^184]: Feast of the Holy Apostle Andrew the First-Called: Sunday Concurrence (Violakis, pp. 234–235, November 30, §§ 4–5). When the feast of Saint Andrew coincides with a Sunday, the Saturday Great Vespers (§ 4) appoints 6 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Apostle at "Lord, I have cried", followed at "Glory" by the Doxastikon of the Apostle and at "Both now and ever" by the First Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone. At the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichira are followed by "Glory" (*Τὸν συναίμονα Πέτρου*) and "Both now and ever" (*Ἰωσὴφ εἰπὲ ἡμῖν*). At Sunday Matins (§ 5), the stichologia Kathismata alternate: one Resurrection Kathisma and one of the Apostle with the Theotokion; at the Third Stichologia, the Kathisma of the Apostle is sung with its Theotokion. The canons combine the Resurrection Canon with the First Canon of the Apostle (*Τὴν τεθολωμένην μου ψυχήν*); after Ode 3, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos are recited plain, followed by the Kathisma of the Apostle and the Theotokion; after Ode 6, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Apostle are sung with the Menaion Synaxarion; and the Katavasiai are *Χριστὸς γεννᾶται*. At the Praises, 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Apostle are sung; at "Glory", the Doxastikon of the Apostle *Τὸν κήρυκα τῆς πίστεως* is sung in place of the Sunday Eothinon Doxastikon, followed at "Both now and ever" by *Ὑπερευλογημένη*. At the Sunday Divine Liturgy, the Typika and Beatitudes combine the Tone and the Apostle's canon, joining the Apostolic lections with the Resurrectional office.
