[^185]: Commemoration of the Holy Great-Martyr Barbara and our Venerable Father John of Damascus, and Concurrence with Sunday (Violakis, pp. 236–239, November 30 § 6 concl.; December 4, §§ 1–4). Physical leaf p251 (printed page 236) and facing English leaf p252 (printed page 237) conclude Cohort 25 by finishing § 6 of the feast of Saint Andrew the First-Called (the Eucharistic Liturgy propers when falling on a Sunday), and inaugurate the liturgical month of December with the commemorations of the Holy Great-Martyr Barbara (d. ca. 306) and our Venerable Father John of Damascus (d. ca. 749), Doctor of the Church and melodist of the Octoechos and the Paschal Canon. On a weekday (§ 1), the service follows the Menaion, prescribing the Nativity Forefeast Theotokion *Θεοτόκε, σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος ἡ ἀληθινή* ("O Theotokos, Thou art the true vine") at the Aposticha of Vespers. When December 4 coincides with a Sunday (§§ 2–4), Saturday Great Vespers assigns 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of Saint Barbara, and 3 of Saint John Damascene at "Lord, I have cried", followed at "Glory" by the Doxastikon of the Great-Martyr and at "Both now and ever" by the First Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone; at the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichira are followed at "Glory" by that of Saint John and at "Both now and ever" by *Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου* ("My Maker and Redeemer, Christ the Lord"). At Sunday Matins (§ 3), the Canons unite the Resurrection Canon with those of the Saints; after Ode 3, the Kathisma of Saint Barbara (*Τὸν νυμφίον σου Χριστὸν ἀγαπήσασα* / "Having loved Christ thy Bridegroom") is joined with that of Saint John (*Τὴν τοῦ βίου ἀπάτην* / "The deceit of this life") and the Theotokion (*Τὸ ἐξαίσιον θαῦμα* / "The astounding miracle"); and the Katavasiai of the Nativity (*Χριστὸς γεννᾶται* / "Christ is born, give ye glory") are chanted, followed by the complete Sunday Morning Gospel cursus. At the Praises, 4 Resurrection Stichira are joined with 4 of the Venerable Father (transferred from the Aposticha of Vespers), concluding with the appointed Sunday Eothinon Doxastikon.

[^186]: Commemoration of our Venerable and God-bearing Father Savvas the Sanctified and Sunday Concurrence (Violakis, pp. 238–241, December 4 § 4 concl.; December 5, §§ 1–4). December 5 commemorates Saint Savvas the Sanctified (439–532), founder of the Great Laura (Mar Saba) in the Judean wilderness and patron of the ancient Sabaitic monastic typikon that forms the liturgical foundation of the Byzantine rite. Concluding December 4 (§ 4), the Divine Liturgy assigns 4 Beatitudes to the Tone and 4 to Ode 6 of the Canon of Saint Barbara, with her Epistle (Galatians 3:23–4:5) preceding the Sunday Gospel. For December 5 on a weekday (§ 1), the service is chanted according to the Menaion, concluding the Aposticha of Vespers with the Theotokion *Δέσποινα, πρόσδεξαι* ("Lady, accept the prayers of Thy servants"). When December 5 falls on a Sunday (§§ 2–4), Saturday Great Vespers prescribes 6 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of Saint Savvas at "Lord, I have cried", followed at "Glory" by the Doxastikon of the Saint and at "Both now and ever" by the First Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone; three Old Testament composite readings from the Wisdom books (Wisdom 3:1–9; 5:15–6:3; 4:7–15) are read; and the Aposticha conclude with "Glory" of Saint Savvas and "Both now and ever" *Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε* ("O unwedded Virgin"). At Sunday Matins (§ 3), the Litiya of Saint Savvas is performed after Psalm 50 [LXX]; at the Psalter, the first two stichologiai take the Resurrection Kathismata while the third assigns the Kathisma of the Saint; the canons combine the Resurrection Canon with that of the Saint; after Ode 3, the Kontakion, Ikos, and Kathisma of Saint Savvas are chanted; after Ode 6, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos are chanted with the Menaion Synaxarion; and the Katavasiai are *Χριστὸς γεννᾶται*. At the Divine Liturgy (§ 4), the Beatitudes assign 4 to the Tone and 4 to Ode 6 of the Saint's canon, with the Epistle of the Saint (Galatians 5:22–6:2, the fruits of the Spirit) read before the Sunday Gospel.

[^187]: Feast of Saint Nicholas the Wonderworker, Archbishop of Myra in Lycia, and Patriarchal Textual Criticism on Nicholas Malaxos (Violakis, pp. 240–243, December 5 § 4 concl.; December 6, §§ 1–3, Note 1). December 6 marks the universal solemnity of Saint Nicholas the Wonderworker, Archbishop of Myra in Lycia (ca. 270–343). At Great Vespers on a weekday (§ 1), following the First Stasis of the Psalter (*Blessed is the man*, Pss. 1–3 LXX), 6 Prosomoia are sung at "Lord, I have cried" to the model melody *Μύροις παροικήσας αἰσθητῶς* ("Having dwelt in Myra in the flesh"), followed by three Old Testament lections (Proverbs 10:7, 6; 3:13–16; 8:6 etc.; Proverbs 10:31–11:12; Wisdom 4:7–15). At Matins (§ 2), after the Polyeleos and the First Antiphon of Tone 4 (*Ἐκ νεότητός μου* / "From my youth"), the Prokeimenon is Psalm 115:6 LXX (*Τίμιος ἐναντίον Κυρίου ὁ θάνατος τῶν ὁσίων αὐτοῦ* / "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints"), the Gospel is John 10:9–16, and the canons unite the Theotokion Canon *ᾨδὴν ἐπινίκιον* with the Saint's Canon *Ἀπόρῳ γλώττῃ καὶ χείλεσιν* ("With halting tongue and lips"). Crucially, printed Note 1 on page 240 records a fundamental patriarchal textual decree: the other three Prosomoia composed to the melody *Ποίοις εὐφημιῶν* ("With what garlands of praise") are explicitly prohibited because their author, Nicholas Malaxos (Presbyter of Peloponnesus and Protopresbyter of Nauplion, fl. ca. 1580–1640), had arbitrarily inserted his own compositions into the Venetian printed Menaia without patriarchal synodal sanction. The Holy Synod in Constantinople formally condemned Malaxos as an ecclesiastical innovator (*καινοτόμος*) and permanently banned his interpolated hymns from liturgical cantillation across the Orthodox Church.

[^188]: Feast of Saint Nicholas the Wonderworker: Sunday Concurrence Propers and Liturgical Distribution (Violakis, pp. 242–245, December 6, §§ 4–6). When the feast of Saint Nicholas coincides with a Sunday, the Typikon establishes the full rubrical synthesis between the Resurrectional dominical cursus and the feast of the Hierarch. At Saturday Great Vespers (§ 4), 4 Resurrection Stichira and 6 of Saint Nicholas (*Μύροις παροικήσας*) are chanted at "Lord, I have cried", followed at "Glory" by the Doxastikon of the Saint and at "Both now and ever" by the First Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone; the Old Testament lections of the Hierarch are read; and at the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichira are joined with "Glory" of the Saint and the Forefeast Theotokion *Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε, πόθεν ἥκεις;* ("O unwedded Virgin, whence art thou come?"). At Sunday Matins (§ 5), following the Polyeleos, the Kathismata are distributed across three stichologiai: at the first two, one Resurrection Kathisma and one of Saint Nicholas with its Theotokion; at the third, the Kathisma of the Saint with its Theotokion. The canons combine the Resurrection Canon with that of the Hierarch; after Ode 3, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos are recited plain, followed by the Kathisma and Theotokion of Saint Nicholas; after Ode 6, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint are chanted with the Menaion Synaxarion; and the Katavasiai are *Χριστὸς γεννᾶται*. At the Praises, 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint are sung, followed at "Glory" by the Saint's Doxastikon *Σαλπίσωμεν ἐν σάλπιγγι ᾀσμάτων* ("Let us blow the trumpet of praise") and at "Both now and ever" by *Ὑπερευλογημένη* ("Most blessed art Thou, O Virgin Theotokos").

[^189]: Feast of the Conception of Saint Anna, the Mother of the Theotokos, and Dedication of the Church of the Resurrection in Jerusalem (Violakis, pp. 244–245, December 6 § 6 concl.; December 9, §§ 1–3). December 9 celebrates the Conception by Saint Anna of the Most Holy Theotokos, joined with the commemoration of the Dedication (*Enkainia*) of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre (the Anastasis) in Jerusalem. On a weekday (§ 1), both offices are combined according to the Menaion. When December 9 coincides with a Sunday (§§ 2–3), Saturday Great Vespers appoints 6 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of Saint Anna at "Lord, I have cried", followed at "Glory" by *Τὸ ἀπόρρητον τοῖς Ἀγγέλοις* ("That which was inexpressible to the Angels") and at "Both now and ever" by the First Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone; at the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichira conclude at "Glory; Both now and ever" with *Σήμερον ἐκ ῥίζης τοῦ Δαβίδ* ("Today from the root of David"); and the Dismissal Troparion of Saint Anna is *Σήμερον τῆς ἀτεκνίας δεσμὰ διαλύονται* ("Today the bonds of barrenness are loosed"). At Sunday Matins (§ 3), the Polyeleos is chanted; the Kathismata interleave 2 of the Resurrection and one of Saint Anna (*Ὁ νέος οὐρανός* / "The new heaven") at the first stichologia, and 2 of the Resurrection and one of Saint Anna (*Ἀναβόησον, Δαυίδ* / "Cry aloud, O David") at the second; the canons unite the Resurrection Canon with that of Saint Anna (*Τὴν σύλληψιν σήμερον* / "Thy conception today"); after Ode 3, the Kathisma *Χορὸς προφητικός* ("The prophetic choir") is sung with the Theotokion *Ἰωακεὶμ ὁ Ἱερεὺς καὶ ἡ Ἄννα* ("Joachim the Priest and Anna"); after Ode 6, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos are chanted with the Synaxarion; and the Katavasiai are *Χριστὸς γεννᾶται*. At the Praises, 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of Saint Anna (*Πληροφοροῦ, Ἀδάμ* / "Rejoice, O Adam") are sung, with the leaf terminating mid-sentence at "Both now and ever: Most", which resolves seamlessly into Cohort 27 on physical leaf p261.
