[^138]: The Post-Anaphora Communion Rites, Elevation, Fraction, Post-Communion Psalmody, and Dismissal of the Divine Liturgy (Violakis, pp. 146–147, §3 cont.). Following the Eucharistic Anaphora and the commemoration of the Theotokos and the Diptychs, the Divine Liturgy moves to the communion rites. The Deacon begins the Litany of Supplication before the Lord's Prayer: "Having remembered all the saints, again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord" (*Πάντων τῶν ἁγίων μνημονεύσαντες...*), praying for the unity of the faith and the communion of the Holy Spirit. The Priest chants the ecphonesis: "And make us worthy, Master, with boldness and without condemnation, to dare to call upon Thee, the heavenly God, as Father, and to say:" (*Καὶ καταξίωσον ἡμᾶς, Δέσποτα...*), whereupon the Superior (or all the faithful) recites the Lord's Prayer (*Pater hemon*). Following the doxological ecphonesis ("For Thine is the kingdom..."), the greeting of peace, and the Inclination of Heads with its silent sacerdotal prayer, the sacred climax of the Elevation occurs: the Deacon proclaims "Let us attend!" (*Πρόσχωμεν*), and the Priest elevates the Holy Bread above the diskos, proclaiming: "The Holy Things for the holy!" (*Τὰ Ἅγια τοῖς ἁγίοις*). The choirs respond with the christological confession: "One is Holy, one is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen" (*Εἷς Ἅγιος, εἷς Κύριος...*). While the clergy communicate within the sanctuary, the Second Choir sings the Sunday Communion Verse (Psalm 148:1 LXX): "Praise the Lord from the heavens: praise Him in the highest. Alleluia" (*Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν, Ἀλληλούϊα*). After the fraction (*klasis*) and commixture (*enosis*), the Deacon appears at the Holy Doors bearing the Holy Chalice and invites the faithful: "Approach with the fear of God, faith, and love!" (*Μετὰ φόβου Θεοῦ, πίστεως καὶ ἀγάπης προσέλθετε*). The Priest blesses the assembly: "Save, O God, Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance" (*Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν σου*), and the First Choir chants the Pentecost troparion in Tone 2: "We have seen the true light, we have received the Heavenly Spirit, we have found the true faith, worshiping the undivided Trinity: for He hath saved us" (*Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν*). The Priest elevates the chalice over the Holy Table, saying inaudibly "Blessed is our God," and turning toward the people proclaims: "Always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages" (*Πάντοτε νῦν καὶ ἀεί...*). Following the Post-Communion Thanksgiving Litany (*Ὀρθοὶ μεταλαβόντες*), the Deacon bids: "Let us depart in peace. Let us pray to the Lord", and the Priest exits the sanctuary to recite the Prayer behind the Ambo (*Ὀπισθάμβωνος Εὐχή*): "O Lord Who blessest those that bless Thee..." (*Ὁ εὐλογῶν τοὺς εὐλογοῦντάς σε, Κύριε*). The choirs sing three times in Tone 2: "Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth, and unto the ages" (*Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου εὐλογημένον*, Psalm 112:2 LXX). The Proistamenos intones "Make firm, O Lord God, the holy Orthodox faith," the Priest gives the Sunday dismissal, and the faithful kiss the hand of the celebrant and receive the antidoron (*ἀντίδωρον*).

[^139]: The Ecclesiastical New Year (Indiction), September 1, St. Simeon the Stylite, and the Synaxis of the Theotokos of Miasena (Violakis, pp. 148–149, September 1, §1). The opening of the Fixed Cycle of the Menaion on September 1 marks the Byzantine Ecclesiastical New Year, designated the Indiction (*Ἀρχὴ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου*, Latin *Indictio*). The term originally designated the fifteen-year imperial Roman and Byzantine fiscal tax assessment cycle established under Emperor Constantine the Great, fixed to September 1 in 312 AD, and later codified as the official civil and ecclesiastical calendar beginning under Emperor Justinian I in 537 AD (Novella 47). In Christian typological theology, September 1 sanctifies the passage of cosmic time, commemorating Christ's inauguration of His public ministry in the synagogue of Nazareth (Luke 4:16–22) when He unrolled the scroll of the Prophet Isaiah and proclaimed "the acceptable year of the Lord" (Isaiah 61:1–2). Concurrently, the Church commemorates the venerable father St. Simeon the Stylite the Elder (c. 390–459 AD), who introduced the ascetic discipline of pillar-dwelling (stylitism) atop a column near Antioch, together with his mother St. Martha; as well as the Synaxis of the Most Holy Mother of God of Miasena (*Μιασηνῶν*), commemorating the miraculous discovery in the ninth century of her wonderworking icon, which had been cast into Lake Miasena in Armenia to preserve it from iconoclastic destruction during the reign of Emperor Leo the Isaurian. On weekdays, Great Vespers features the First Stasis of the First Kathisma of the Psalter (*Blessed is the man*, Psalm 1 LXX), ten Stichira at "Lord, I have cried" (three Prosomia of the Indiction, three of St. Simeon, and four Idiomela of the Indiction), festive Old Testament readings from Leviticus, Isaiah, and Wisdom, and concluding Dismissal Troparia: the Troparion of the Indiction, "O Creator of the universe, Who hast set the times and seasons in Thine own power..." (*Ὁ πάσης δημιουργός*, Tone 2); the Troparion of St. Simeon, "Thou didst become a pillar of endurance, O venerable one..." (*Ὑπομονῆς στῦλος*, Tone 1); and the Theotokion "Hail, full of grace, O Virgin Theotokos..." (*Χαῖρε κεχαριτωμένη*).

[^140]: Weekday Matins & Liturgy of the Indiction, Katavasiai of the Holy Cross, and Sunday Vespers Concurrence (Violakis, pp. 150–151, September 1, §§2–5). At Matins of the Indiction on a weekday, following the Midnight Office and the Hexapsalmos, the Troparia are chanted at "God is the Lord" as at Vespers. The hymnography includes two canons: the Canon of the Indiction (composed by St. John of Damascus, Tone 3) and the Canon of St. Simeon Stylites (Tone 2). A liturgical milestone occurs at the Katavasiai: beginning on September 1, the Church appoints the Katavasiai of the Universal Exaltation of the Precious and Life-Creating Cross: "Moses, having etched the cross with his rod, divided the Red Sea for Israel walking on foot..." (*Σταυρὸν χαράξας Μωσῆς*, Tone 8). These Katavasiai are chanted continuously through the Apodosis of the Exaltation on September 21. At the Divine Liturgy on weekdays, the Typika and Beatitudes incorporate troparia from Odes 3 and 6 of the Indiction Canon, followed by the Epistle (1 Tim. 2:1–7) and Gospel (Luke 4:16–22) of the Indiction, and the proper Communion Verse (Psalm 64:12 LXX): "Bless the crown of the year with Thy goodness, O Lord" (*Εὐλόγησον τὸν στέφανον τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ τῆς χρηστότητός σου, Κύριε*). When September 1 coincides with the Lord's Day (§§4–5), the Resurrectional service of the Octoechos joins with the Indiction: at Saturday Great Vespers, four Resurrection Stichira, three of the Indiction, and three of the Saint are chanted at "Lord, I have cried", crowned by the Indiction Doxastikon: "O Holy Spirit, Who art bound together with the Father and the Son in eternal timelessness..." (*Ὁ πνεύματι ἁγίῳ*), and the First Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone.

[^141]: Sunday Concurrence of the Indiction, the Sunday before the Exaltation, and the Miracle of Archangel Michael at Chonae (Violakis, pp. 152–153, September 1 §6 & September 6 §§1–2). When September 1 falls on a Sunday, the Divine Liturgy appoints the Beatitudes divided four of the Resurrection Tone and four of Ode 6 of the Indiction Canon. Following the Little Entrance, the Dismissal Troparia are: the Resurrection Troparion, the Troparion of the Indiction, the Theotokion "Hail, full of grace", the Troparion of St. Simeon, and the Patron Saint of the temple, sealed by the Indiction Kontakion. Violakis records a critical calendar rule regarding the Saturday Indiction: if September 1 falls on a Saturday, the immediately subsequent Sunday is September 2; thus, on the following Sunday (which falls on September 8, or September 7 if an inclusive count was loosely used), the Epistle (Gal. 6:11–18) and Gospel (John 3:13–17) are appointed for the "Sunday before the Exaltation" (*Κυριακὴ πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως*). On September 6, the Church commemorates the Miracle of the Archangel Michael at Colossae in Phrygia (Chonae) (*Τὸ ἐν Χώναις θαῦμα τοῦ Ἀρχιστρατήγου Μιχαήλ*), where the Archangel struck a great rock with his staff to open a subterranean chasm, swallowing two rushing torrents (the Lykokapros and Kouphos) diverted by pagans to submerge the sanctuary of the Archangel and destroy the hermit St. Archippus. When this feast falls on Sunday, Saturday Vespers joins six Resurrection Stichira with four of the Archangel, with the festal Doxastikon "Rejoice with us, all ye angelic ranks" (*Συγχάρητε ἡμῖν, ἅπασαι αἱ τῶν ἀγγέλων ταξιαρχίαι*), and the Dismissal Troparion of the Bodiless Powers: "Supreme commander of the heavenly hosts, we implore thee..." (*Τῶν οὐρανίων στρατιῶν Ἀρχιστράτηγε*, Tone 4).

[^142]: The Forefeast of the Nativity of the Theotokos and the Holy Martyr Sozon (Violakis, pp. 154–155, September 7, §§1–3). September 7 commemorates the Forefeast (*Προεόρτια*) of the Nativity of the Most Holy Mother of God, joined with the commemoration of the Holy Martyr Sozon of Lycaonia/Cilicia (martyred c. 304 AD under Maximian). When September 7 occurs on the Lord's Day, it coincides with the Sunday before the Exaltation. At Saturday Great Vespers, ten Stichira are chanted at "Lord, I have cried": six of the Resurrection and four Forefeast Idiomela, followed by the Forefeast Doxastikon: "Thy most venerable Nativity, O all-holy Virgin, pure Mother of God, the multitude of angels in heaven and the race of men upon earth do glorify..." (*Τὴν πάνσεπτόν σου Γέννησιν*), and the First Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone. At the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichira are concluded by the Forefeast Doxastikon: "The universal joy hath shone forth upon us from the righteous ones, Joachim and Anna..." (*Ἡ παγκόσμιος χαρά*), and the Dismissal Troparia: the Resurrection Troparion and the Forefeast Troparion: "From the root of Jesse and from the loins of David, Mary the child of God is born unto us today..." (*Ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης Ἰεσσαί*, Tone 4). Violakis notes that the hymnography of the Martyr Sozon is ordinarily relegated to Small Compline; however, if the local temple or parish observes his feast, three stichira of the Saint are intercalated at "Lord, I have cried" and his Troparion is added. At Sunday Matins, two Resurrection Kathismata and one Forefeast Kathisma are sung at each of the two Psalter stichologia. The Canons unite the Sunday Canon and the Forefeast Canon (with the refrain "Most Holy Theotokos, save us"), punctuated by the Katavasiai of the Cross. At the Liturgy, the readings are taken from the Sunday before the Exaltation (Gal. 6:11–18; John 3:13–17).
