[^480]: Pentecost Vespers Concluded (§ 47), Pentecost Sunday Matins (§ 48), and Opening of Divine Liturgy Antiphon 1 (§ 49 Opening). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p841 (printed page 826) and facing English leaf p842 (printed page 827). Paragraph 47: Concluding rubrics of Great Vespers of Pentecost: At "Lord, I have cried" (*Κύριε ἐκέκραξα*), we chant the three Idiomela of Tone 1 to five (repeating the first and second hymns), and the five of Tone 2: "We have seen the true Light..." (*Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς*) to six (repeating the first hymn); "Glory... Both now and ever...": Tone 8: "Come, all ye peoples, let us worship the Godhead in three Persons..." (*Δεῦτε λαοί*). Entrance with censer, "O Joyful Light" (*Φῶς ἱλαρόν*), the Prokimenon of the day: "The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty!" (*Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν*, Ps. 92:1 LXX), and the Old Testament Readings (Numbers 11:16–17, 24–29; Joel 2:23–32; Ezekiel 36:24–28 LXX). At the Aposticha: the three Idiomela: "The nations, being ignorant of the power of the All-holy Spirit..." (*Ἀγνοοῦντα τὰ ἔθνη, Κύριε*); "Glory... Both now and ever...": Tone 8: "Once the tongues were confused on account of the audacity of the tower-building..." (*Γλῶσσαί ποτε*). The Dismissal Troparion in Tone 8: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, Who hast revealed the fishermen to be most wise, having sent down upon them the Holy Spirit, and through them caught the universe in a net; O Lover of mankind, glory to Thee!" (*Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν*) three times, and the Dismissal with the appointed festal prologue: "May He Who sent down the All-holy Spirit from heaven in the form of fiery tongues upon His holy Disciples and Apostles, Christ our true God..." (*Ὁ ἐν εἴδει πυρίνων γλωσσῶν οὐρανόθεν καταπέμψας τὸ πανάγιον Πνεῦμα ἐπὶ τοὺς ἁγίους αὐτοῦ Μαθητὰς καὶ Ἀποστόλους, Χριστὸς ὁ ἀληθινὸς Θεὸς ἡμῶν...*). Paragraph 48: Sunday Matins of Pentecost: After Psalm 50, the Liti, then the Trisagion, the Dismissal Troparion: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God...", and the Six Psalms. At "God is the Lord" (*Θεὸς Κύριος*): the Dismissal Troparion (three times); then the Psalter and the Polyeleos; the three Kathismata twice each; the Anavathmoi: the first Antiphon of Tone 4 ("From my youth many passions war against me..."), and the Prokimenon: "Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of uprightness!" (*Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὁδηγήσει με ἐν γῇ εὐθείᾳ*, Ps. 142:10 LXX), "Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord!" (*Πᾶσα πνοὴ*), and the Matins Gospel: "When it was evening on that day..." (*Οὔσης ὀψίας*) until "whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained" (John 20:19–23). We do not recite "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ" (*Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ θεασάμενοι*), but read immediately Psalm 50 recited plainly. "Glory...": "Through the intercessions of the Apostles..." (*Ταῖς τῶν Ἀποστόλων*); "Both now and ever...": "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos..." (*Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου*); the Verse: "Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy..." (*Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός*), and the Idiomelon in Tone 6: "O Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit of truth, Who art everywhere present and fillest all things, Treasury of good things and Giver of life: come and dwell in us, and cleanse us from every stain, and save our souls, O Good One!" (*Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε*). Both Canons without verses. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma (once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion in Tone 8: "When the Most High came down and confused the tongues, He divided the nations; but when He distributed the tongues of fire, He called all to unity; and with one voice we glorify the All-holy Spirit!" (*Ὅτε καταβὰς τὰς γλώσσας συνέχεε*), the Ikos, the Menologion of the day, and the Hypomnema of Pentecost. The Katavasias of both Canons [double] (both the Iambic and Heirmologic Katavasias); then the 9th Ode is chanted. The first Exaposteilarion: "O All-holy Spirit, Light proceeding from the Father, through the Son Thou didst come unto the unlettered Disciples..." (*Φῶς ὁ Πατήρ, φῶς ὁ Λόγος, φῶς καὶ τὸ ἅγιον Πνεῦμα*) (twice), and the second: "Our Light and Life is the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit..." (*Τριαδικὸν*) (once). At the Praises: the three Idiomela: "Marvelous things today have all the nations seen..." (*Παράδοξα σήμερον πάντα τὰ ἔθνη*) to four, repeating the first hymn [Note: The Pentekostarion indicates that each Idiomelon is repeated]; "Glory... Both now and ever...": Tone 6: "O Heavenly King, Comforter..." (*Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε*). The Great Doxology, and the Dismissal Troparion: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God...". Paragraph 49: Divine Liturgy of Pentecost: The Appointed Antiphons: First Antiphon (Psalm 18 LXX: "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands...", Refrain: "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, Savior, save us!").

[^481]: Pentecost Divine Liturgy Continued (§ 49 Antiphons 2–3, Entrance, Readings, and Zadostoinyk). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p843 (printed page 828) and facing English leaf p844 (printed page 829). Continuation of Paragraph 49: Second Antiphon (Psalm 19 LXX: "The Lord hear thee in the day of affliction; the name of the God of Jacob defend thee...", Refrain: "Save us, O Good Paraclete, who sing unto Thee: Alleluia!", and "Glory... Both now and ever...": "Only-begotten Son and Word of God, Who art immortal..."); Third Antiphon (Psalm 20 LXX: "In Thy strength the king shall be glad, O Lord, and in Thy salvation how greatly shall he exult!...", Refrain: Dismissal Troparion: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God...") [Printed Note of Violakis: While this last verse ("He asked life of Thee, and Thou gavest him length of days unto the ages of ages") is not indicated in the Typikon, it is found in the Pentekostarion, the Horologion, and the Imerologia of the Patriarchate]. The Entrance Hymn: "Be Thou exalted, O Lord, in Thy strength; we will sing and praise Thy mighty acts! Save us, O Good Paraclete, who sing unto Thee: Alleluia!" (*Ὑψώθητι Κύριε ἐν τῇ δυνάμει σου, ᾄσομεν καὶ ψαλοῦμεν τὰς δυναστείας σου· Σῶσον ἡμᾶς, Παράκλητε ἀγαθέ, τοὺς ψάλλοντάς σοι, Ἀλληλούϊα*, Ps. 20:13 LXX). After the Entrance, the Dismissal Troparion: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God...", and the Kontakion: "When the Most High came down and confused the tongues...". Instead of the Trisagion Hymn, we chant: "As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia!" (*Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε*). The Epistle (Acts 2:1–11) and the Gospel (John 7:37–52; 8:12). At "Especially", in place of "It is truly right" [Axion Estin / Zadostoinyk]: the Ninth Heirmos of the Iambic Canon in Tone 4: "Without experiencing corruption didst thou conceive, and didst lend flesh unto the Word, the Artificer of all, O Mother unwedded, Virgin Theotokos, vessel of the Uncontainable, dwelling-place of thine Infinite Creator: thee do we magnify!" (*Μὴ τῆς φθορᾶς διαπείρᾳ κυοφορήσασα*).

[^482]: Pentecost Liturgy Concluded (§ 49) and Great Vespers of Pentecost with the Kneeling Prayers (§ 50 Opening and Kneeling Prayers). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p845 (printed page 830) and facing English leaf p846 (printed page 831). Concluding rubrics of Pentecost Divine Liturgy: Communion Hymn: "Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of uprightness. Alleluia!" (*Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὁδηγήσει με ἐν γῇ εὐθείᾳ*, Ps. 142:10 LXX) [Printed Note 15 of Violakis: The ancient Typikon, as well as the Pentekostaria, record for today this Communion Hymn and not "Take not Thy Holy Spirit from us," which Constantine [Protopsaltis] proposed and yet corrected in the Apodosis by prescribing "Thy good Spirit"]. At "With the fear of God...", we chant the Dismissal Troparion: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God..."; then "Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth, and unto the ages" (*Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου*), and the Dismissal as indicated at Vespers [Printed Note 16 of Violakis: While the Communion Hymn is being sung, the Deacons take the time to enter the Holy Sanctuary and vest themselves; then they go forth with the Hierarchical Candle-sticks (Dikerotrikera) and stand about the throne. At the Dismissal, the Patriarch vests with Epitrachilion and Omophorion and, standing upon the throne, intones "Blessed is our God..." and begins the Introductory Psalm; the Hierarchs, having received the Antidoron, enter the Holy Sanctuary]. Paragraph 50: Great Vespers of Pentecost with the Kneeling Prayers (The Kneeling Service / Ἑσπερινὸς τῆς Γονυκλισίας): In Great Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm (Ps. 103 LXX), at "Lord, I have cried" (*Κύριε ἐκέκραξα*), we chant six verses of the three Idiomela Stichira of Matins: "Marvelous things today have all the nations seen..." (*Παράδοξα σήμερον*) (repeating each one once); "Glory... Both now and ever...": Tone 6: "O Heavenly King, Comforter..." (*Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε*). Entrance with the censer, "O Joyful Light" (*Φῶς ἱλαρόν*) [Printed Note 17 of Violakis: Since a Great Prokimenon follows, "O Joyful Light" is chanted entirely outside the Sanctuary; and only at its conclusion does the Patriarch enter the Sanctuary, and from thence chants the Prokimenon]. The Great Prokimenon: Tone 7: "Who is a god so great as our God? Thou art the God Who workest wonders!" (*Τίς Θεὸς μέγας ὡς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν; Σὺ εἶ ὁ Θεὸς ὁ ποιῶν θαυμάσια*, Ps. 76:13–14 LXX) with its three verses, chanted once from the Sanctuary [Bema] and once by each of the two Choirs; and immediately the Great Archdeacon intones: "Again and again, bending our knees, let us pray to the Lord!" (*Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι κλίναντες τὰ γόνατα τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν*), and while the people bend their knees, listening in reverent silence with heads uncovered, the Patriarch recites the Prayers to the hearing of all. After the second Prayer, "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, Master Almighty...", the Deacon intones: "Help us, save us, have mercy on us, raise us up...", and the Exclamation: "For Thine it is to show mercy...". The Deacon intones: "Let us all say with our whole soul...", with the Exclamation: "For Thou art a merciful God and lovest mankind...". And immediately the Deacon intones again: "Again and again, bending our knees...", and the next two Prayers are read; at the conclusion, the Deacon intones: "Help us, save us, have mercy on us, raise us up...", and the Exclamation: "By the favor and grace of Thine only-begotten Son...". Then "Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this evening without sin...". Immediately after this, the Deacon intones again: "Again and again, bending our knees...", and the last three Prayers are read [Printed Note 18 of Violakis: In the 1875 edition of the Pentekostarion, three Prayers are given for the final Stasis; but in the ancient Typikon of 1685 and in earlier editions of the Pentekostarion, these three Prayers appear united into two]; at the conclusion, the Deacon intones once again: "Help us, save us, have mercy on us, raise us up...", and the Exclamation: "For Thou art the repose of our souls and bodies...". Then the Deacon intones: "Let us complete our evening prayer unto the Lord...", and the Exclamation: "For Thou art a good God and lovest mankind...". The Patriarch: "Peace be to all"... The Deacon: "Let us bow our heads unto the Lord"; the Patriarch reads the Prayer of Head-inclination and intones the Exclamation: "May the might of Thy Kingdom be blessed and glorified...".

[^483]: Kneeling Vespers Concluded (§ 50), Monday of the Holy Spirit (§§ 51–52), Fast-Free Privilege, and Apodosis of Pentecost Note. Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p847 (printed page 832) and facing English leaf p848 (printed page 833). Concluding rubrics of the Kneeling Vespers of Pentecost: At the Aposticha: the three Idiomela: Tone 3: "Now as a sign unto all men, the Spirit of the Savior hath visibly shone forth upon the Apostles..." (*Νῦν εἰς σημεῖον τοῖς πᾶσιν*); "Glory... Both now and ever...": Tone 8: "Come, all ye peoples, let us worship the Godhead in three Persons..." (*Δεῦτε λαοὶ τὴν Τρισυπόστατον θεότητα*). Then "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace..." (*Νῦν ἀπολύεις*), the Trisagion, the Dismissal Troparion of the Feast: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God..." (*Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν*) three times, and the Dismissal by the Patriarch: "May Christ our true God, Who emptied Himself, leaving the bosom of the Father, and descended from heaven upon earth...", then "Through the prayers of our Holy Fathers...". Paragraph 51: Monday of the Holy Spirit (The Feast of the Holy Spirit): After "Blessed is our God always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.", we say "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee!", "O Heavenly King, Comforter...", the Trisagion, Psalm 50, the Dismissal Troparion of the Feast: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God...", then "Have mercy on us, O God, according to Thy great mercy...", and the rest of the Dismissal of the Midnight Office. Then, after the "Blessed is our God..." of Matins, the Six Psalms are recited as usual. At "God is the Lord" (*Θεὸς Κύριος*): the Dismissal Troparion (three times), and the Psalter, the two Kathismata of the First and Second Stasis twice each, Psalm 50 recited plainly, and both Canons as yesterday without verses. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma: "The All-holy Spirit, proceeding from the Father, and through the Son descended upon the unlettered Disciples..." (*Τὸ Πανάγιον Πνεῦμα*) (once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion in Tone 8: "When the Most High came down...", the Ikos of the Feast, the Menologion, and the Hypomnema of the Monday of the Holy Spirit. The Katavasias: "Covered by a divine cloud..." (*Θείῳ καλυφθείς*) alone; then the 9th Ode is chanted. The first Exaposteilarion (twice) and the second (once). At the Praises: the three Idiomela: "By the Prophets Thou didst proclaim unto us the way of salvation..." (*Ἐν τοῖς Προφήταις ἀνήγγειλας*) to four [repeating the first] {Note: The Pentekostarion indicates that each of the three Idiomela is repeated once for a total of six}; "Glory... Both now and ever...": Tone 8: "Once the tongues were confused on account of the audacity of the tower-building..." (*Γλῶσσαί ποτε συνεχύθησαν*). The Great Doxology, and the Dismissal Troparion: "Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God...". Paragraph 52: Divine Liturgy of the Monday of the Holy Spirit: The Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of the Feast as yesterday; the Dismissal Troparion and the Kontakion. Instead of the Trisagion Hymn: "As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia!" (*Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε*). Epistle (Ephesians 5:8–19) and Gospel (Matthew 18:10–20) of the day. At "Especially", in place of "It is truly right" [Axion Estin / Zadostoinyk]: "Rejoice, O Queen, boasting of virgins and mothers!..." (*Χαίροις Ἄνασσα*); Communion Hymn: "Take not Thy Holy Spirit from us, we pray Thee, O Lover of mankind. Alleluia!" (*Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἅγιον μὴ ἀντανέλῃς ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν δεόμεθα, φιλάνθρωπε*); "We have seen the true Light...", "Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth, and unto the ages", and Dismissal: "May He Who sent down the All-holy Spirit from heaven in the form of fiery tongues upon His holy Disciples and Apostles, Christ our true God...". Fast-Free Privilege: During this entire week of Holy Pentecost, fast-free privilege is observed; all foods are permitted. Apodosis of Pentecost Note: On Saturday of this week the Apodosis of the Feast of Pentecost takes place. The Service is sung exactly as prescribed in Paragraphs 47–49, with the exception, in Vespers, [Printed Note 19 of Violakis: At "Lord, I have cried", we set for the Apodosis eight verses only] of the Old Testament Readings; in Matins, of the Liti, of the Polyeleos with the Kathisma of the Third Stasis, and of the Matins Gospel. In the Divine Liturgy, we read the Epistle and Gospel of the day.

[^484]: Apodosis of Pentecost Liturgy Concluded (§ 52), Katavasias After Feast, and Sunday of All Saints: Vespers, Matins, and Liturgy (§§ 53–55). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p849 (printed page 834) and facing English leaf p850 (printed page 835). Concluding rubrics of the Apodosis of Pentecost: At "Especially", in place of "It is truly right" [Axion Estin / Zadostoinyk]: the Katavasia: "Rejoice, O Queen, boasting of virgins and mothers!..." (*Χαίροις Ἄνασσα*); Communion Hymn: "Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of uprightness. Alleluia!" (*Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθόν*); then "We have seen the true Light...", "Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth, and unto the ages", the Dismissal, and the Apodosis. Rubric for Katavasias After the Apodosis: After the Apodosis of the Feast, the following Katavasias are sung henceforth: "I shall open my mouth, and it shall be filled with the Spirit..." (*Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου*); and in the Divine Liturgy, we sing the Kontakion: "O Protection of Christians unashamed, Mediatress before the Creator unwavering..." (*Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν*). Paragraph 53: The First Sunday After Pentecost: All Saints: Great Vespers: On Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm (Ps. 103 LXX) and the Psalter (First Kathisma: "Blessed is the man", Pss. 1–3 LXX), at "Lord, I have cried" (*Κύριε ἐκέκραξα*), we chant six Resurrectional Stichera in Tone 8 and four of the Saints; "Glory...": Doxastikon in Tone 6: "The divine choir of the Martyrs, the foundation of the Church, the perfection of the Gospel..." (*Μαρτύρων θεῖος χορός*); "Both now and ever...": Dogmatic Theotokion in Tone 6: "Who would not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin?..." (*Τίς μὴ μακαρίσει σε* / *Ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν οὐρανῶν*). Entrance with censer, "O Joyful Light" (*Φῶς ἱλαρόν*), the Prokimenon of the day: "The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty!" (*Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν*, Ps. 92:1 LXX), and the Old Testament Readings (Isaiah 43:9–14; Wisdom of Solomon 3:1–9; 5:15–6:3 LXX). At the Aposticha: the Resurrectional Stichera; "Glory...": Doxastikon in Tone 6: "Come, all ye faithful today, let us celebrate in chorus with psalms and hymns..." (*Δεῦτε πιστοὶ σήμερον*); "Both now and ever...": Theotokion in Tone 6: "My Maker and Redeemer, Christ the Lord, proceeding from thy womb, O all-pure Virgin..." (*Ὁ Ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου*). The Resurrectional Dismissal Troparion in Tone 8, that of the Saints in Tone 4: "Clothed in the blood of Thy Martyrs throughout all the world as in purple and fine linen, Thy Church through them crieth unto Thee, O Christ God: Send down Thy compassions upon Thy people; grant peace unto Thy commonwealth, and unto our souls great mercy!" (*Τῶν ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ κόσμῳ Μαρτύρων σου*); the Theotokion, and Dismissal. Paragraph 54: Sunday Matins of All Saints: After Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Saints, and "It is truly right to bless thee, O Theotokos..." (*Ἄξιόν ἐστιν*); then the Trisagion, the Dismissal Troparion of the Saints: "Clothed in the blood of Thy Martyrs...", and the Six Psalms. At "God is the Lord" (*Θεὸς Κύριος*): the Dismissal Troparia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos (Psalm 118 LXX / 17th Kathisma). The Resurrectional Kathismata of the First and Second Stasis [Stichologia], the Resurrectional Evlogitaria ("Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me Thy statutes"), the Ypakoe of Tone 8, the Anavathmoi of Tone 8, and the Prokimenon of Tone 8. The Canons: the Resurrectional Canon and that of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrectional Kontakion with its Ikos recited plainly, then the Kathisma of the Saints with its Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion in Tone 8: "Unto Thee, O Lord, the Planter of creation, the world offereth the God-bearing Martyrs as first-fruits of nature..." (*Ὡς ἀπαρχὰς τῆς φύσεως*), the Ikos of the Pentecostarion, the Menologion of the day, and the Hypomnema of the Sunday of All Saints. The Katavasias: "I shall open my mouth..." (*Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου*), and the entire order of the Matins Gospel (First Eothinon: Matthew 28:16–20); then we chant with verses: "More honorable than the Cherubim..." (*Τὴν τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβίμ*). Exaposteilaria: the Resurrectional Exaposteilarion, the two of the Saints, and the Theotokion. At the Praises: four Resurrectional Stichera and four of the Saints; "Glory...": First Eothinon Doxastikon in Tone 1: "When the Disciples were hastening to the mountain for the Ascension on high..." (*Εἰς τὸ Ὄρος τοῖς Μαθηταῖς*); "Both now and ever...": Tone 2: "Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos..." (*Ὑπερευλογημένη ὑπάρχεις*). The Great Doxology, and "Today is salvation come into the world..." (*Σήμερον σωτηρία*). Paragraph 55: Divine Liturgy of All Saints: The Typika and the four Beatitudes of Tone 8, and four hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saints: "As an honorable, chosen living temple..." (*Ὡς ἔντιμον, ἐκλεκτόν*). After the Entrance, the Resurrectional Dismissal Troparion, that of the Saints, that of the Patron Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion: "Unto Thee, O Lord, the Planter of creation...". The Epistle of the Saints (Hebrews 11:33–12:2) and Gospel of the Saints (Matthew 10:32–33, 37–38; 19:27–30). At "Especially", "It is truly right to bless thee, O Theotokos..." (*Ἄξιόν ἐστιν*).
