[^450]: Great and Holy Friday: Vespers of the Deposition from the Cross Opening (The Royal Ninth Hour Concluded and Vespers of Apokathelosis Opening) (§§ 83 Concluded, 84 Opening). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p781 (printed page 766) and facing English leaf p782 (printed page 767). Concluding rubrics of the Royal Ninth Hour: The choirs conclude the antiphonal chanting of the solemn Passion Sticheron: "Today is hung upon the Tree, He Who suspended the earth upon the waters" (Semeron krematai epi xylou), finishing with: "Show us also Thy glorious Resurrection!" (Deixon hemin kai ten endoxon sou Anastasin). The Old Testament Prophecy is proclaimed: Jeremiah 11:18–12:4, 9–10, 14–15 LXX (The Innocent Lamb Led to the Slaughter: "I was like an innocent lamb led to the slaughter; I knew not that they devised an evil device against me"); the Epistle: Hebrews 10:19–31 (A New and Living Way Opened through the Veil of His Flesh); and the Gospel: John 19:23–37 (The Parting of the Garments, "It Is Finished", and the Piercing of His Sacred Side). The Reader recites: "Deliver us not up utterly, for Thy holy Name's sake, and make not Thy covenant void..." (Me de paradoes hemas eis telos, Dan. 3:34 LXX), the Trisagion Prayers, the Kontakion of Great Friday in Tone 8: "Come, let us all hymn Him Who was crucified for us...", "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), the Prayer of the Hours: "Thou Who at all times and at every hour...", the prayer of Saint Basil the Great: "O Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, Who hast patiently endured our transgressions...", and the Dismissal is given, concluding the Royal Hours. Paragraph 84: Great and Holy Friday: Vespers of the Taking Down of the Body of Christ from the Cross (Apokathelosis): After the Introductory Psalm (Psalm 103 LXX), at "Lord, I have cried" (Kyrie ekekraxa), the five Idiomela of the Aposticha are chanted for six verses: 1. "All creation was altered with fear when it beheld Thee hanging upon the Cross, O Christ..." (Pasa he ktisis elloiouto phobo) (twice); 2. "Why does the impious and lawless people imagine vain things?..." (Laos dyssebes kai paranomos); 3. "Today, seeing Thee, O Word, hanging upon the Cross, the blameless Virgin wept..." (Semeron se theorousa he amemptos Parthenos); 4. "Beholding Thee, the Creator and God of all, lifted up upon the Tree..." (Epi xylou blepousa kremamenon); 5. "Today the Master of creation stands before Pilate..." (Semeron ho Despotes tes ktiseos). "Glory...": Doxastikon in Tone 6: "O how did the lawless assembly condemn the King of creation to death!..." (O pos he paranomos synagoge); "Both now and ever...": Theotokion in Tone 6: "A fearful and marvelous mystery is seen accomplished today: He Who is untouchable is held fast..." (Phoberon kai paradoxon mysterion). The Little Entrance is made with the Holy Gospel Book; "O Gladsome Light" (Phos hilaron) is chanted; and immediately the three Old Testament readings are proclaimed: Exodus 33:11–23 LXX (The Lord Speaks with Moses Face to Face, and Moses Beholds the Glory of God from the Cleft of the Rock); Job 42:12–17 LXX (The Lord Blesses the Latter End of Job More than His Beginning); and Isaiah 52:13–54:1 LXX (The Fourth Servant Song: "Behold, My Servant Shall Prosper"). The Epistle: 1 Corinthians 1:18–31; 2:1–2 (The Word of the Cross is Foolishness to Those Who Perish, but to Us Who Are Saved It Is the Power of God); and the Gospel: Matthew 27:1–38; Luke 23:39–43; Matthew 27:39–54; John 19:31–37; Matthew 27:55–61 (The Composite Passion Gospel of the Crucifixion, the Death, and the Deposition of the Lord) read from the elevated ambo. At the words: "Now when evening was come, there came a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph...", the ceremonial rite of the Taking Down from the Cross (Apokathelosis) is enacted: the sculpted figure of Christ is removed from the large Crucifix, wrapped in a pure white linen shroud, and carried into the Sanctuary. The litanies follow: "Let us all say with our whole soul...", "Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this evening without sin...", and "Let us complete our evening supplication unto the Lord". After the exclamation: "Blessed and glorified be the might of Thy kingdom: of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.", the choirs gather by the northern door of the Sanctuary and begin chanting the Aposticha. Six priests with uncovered heads (without kamilavkia), vested in phelonia and epitrachilia, carrying the Epitaphios [Plashchanytsia] upon their heads with reverence, led by the Great Archimandrite carrying the Holy Gospel Book, exit from the Sanctuary preceded by candle-bearers, processional fans [hexapteryga], the chanters, the Primikirios bearing the two-branched candlestick [divamvoulon], and deacons censing; they advance to the middle of the nave, where the decorated Tomb [Kuvuklion] stands prepared.

[^451]: Great and Holy Friday: Vespers Concluded (Entombment of the Epitaphios and Dismissal) and Great and Holy Saturday: Matins Opening (§ 84 Concluded, Matins Opening). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p783 (printed page 768) and facing English leaf p784 (printed page 769). Paragraph 84 Concluded: The solemn procession of the Epitaphios [Plashchanytsia] reaches the center of the temple where the Tomb [Sepulchre / Kuvuklion] stands decorated. The chanters take their stations and continue chanting the Aposticha. The six priests bearing the Epitaphios upon their heads make three circuits around the Tomb, then place the Epitaphios inside it; the Great Ecclesiarch sprinkles the Epitaphios with sweet-smelling flowers. The Patriarch descends from the throne, advances to the Tomb, venerates the Holy Gospel Book and the Epitaphios, and blesses the people while the choirs sing: "Many years to you, Master!" (Eis polla ete); he then returns to the throne. The concelebrating Hierarchs approach two by two, venerate the Epitaphios, and receive flowers from the Patriarch, followed in turn by all the ecclesiastical officials. In the meantime, the Second Choir slowly and melodiously chants the renowned Doxastikon in Tone 5: "Glory... Both now and ever...": "Thou Who clothest Thyself with light as with a garment, when Joseph with Nicodemus took Thee down from the Tree, beholding Thee dead, stripped, and unburied, he wept in sorrow and mourning, and said: Woe is me, most sweet Jesus!..." (Se ton anaballomenon to phos). Then the prayer of Saint Symeon: "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word..." (Luke 2:29–32); the Reader recites the Trisagion Prayers; and the Dismissal Troparia in Tone 2 are chanted: 1. "The noble Joseph, taking down Thine undefiled Body from the Tree, wrapped It in a clean linen shroud and with sweet spices, and laid It for burial in a new tomb" (Ho euschemon Joseph) down to "and laid It for burial" (kedeusas apetheto); and 2. "Unto the myrrh-bearing women the angel stood by the tomb and cried aloud: Myrrh is fitting for the dead, but Christ has shown Himself foreign to corruption" (Tais myrophorois gynaixi) down to "foreign to corruption" (diaphthoras edeichthe allotrios). The solemn Dismissal of Great Friday is given: "Wisdom!"; "Blessed is He Who is, Christ our God, always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen."; "Glory to Thee, O God, our hope, glory to Thee. May Christ our true God, Who for us men and for our salvation condescended to the terrible Passions and the life-giving Cross and voluntary entombment in the flesh, through the intercessions of His all-pure and blameless holy Mother, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for He is good and loves mankind", and the final benediction: "Through the prayers of our holy fathers...". Paragraph 85 Opening / Footnote 46: Great and Holy Saturday Matins (The Service of the Lamentations / Epitaphios Threnos): Heading and historical-canonical footnote. Footnote 46 records that because many faithful in urban settings experienced difficulty leaving their homes around midnight to attend the Matins service at the Seventh Hour of the night (1:00 a.m.), pastoral economy and dispensation [oikonomia] established the custom of anticipating this Matins service to the First Hour of the night (7:00 p.m. on Friday evening), coinciding with the traditional hour of the Bridegroom Matins services earlier in Holy Week. The Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great is postponed until the following morning (Holy Saturday); thus the immense length of a combined nocturnal vigil is divided into two manageable liturgical celebrations.

[^452]: Great and Holy Saturday: Matins of the Lamentations Opening (The Amomos, Canon of the Holy Sabbath, and Stasis I of the Enkomia) (§ 85 Opening). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p785 (printed page 770) and facing English leaf p786 (printed page 771). Paragraph 85 Opening: Great and Holy Saturday Matins (The Lamentations at the Tomb / Epitaphios Threnos): When celebrated according to ancient monastic observance at the Seventh Hour of the night (1:00 a.m.), the Amomos (Psalm 118 LXX) and the Old Testament readings omitted from the Vespers of Great Saturday are read here (Footnote 47 notes that if Matins is anticipated at 7:00 p.m., the Amomos and readings are read in the morning before Vespers). The Priest gives the blessing: "Blessed is our God always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages"; the Superior [Proestos] says: "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. O Heavenly King...", the Reader the Trisagion Prayers, the Priest "For Thine is the kingdom...", the Reader the Troparia ("Save, O Lord, Thy people..."), and the Superior recites the Six Psalms. At "God is the Lord" (Theos Kyrios), the Dismissal Troparia in Tone 2: "The noble Joseph..." until "and laid It for burial"; "Glory...": Tone 2: "When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, then didst Thou slay Hades with the brilliance of Thy Divinity..." (Hote katelthes pros ton thanaton) in its entirety; "Both now and ever...": Tone 2: "Unto the myrrh-bearing women..." until "foreign to corruption". Small Litany, followed by the Sessional Hymn [Kathisma] in Tone 1: "In a clean shroud and with spices, the noble Joseph, taking down Thine all-pure Body from the Tree, wrapped It and laid It in a new tomb; and so early in the morning the myrrh-bearing women cried aloud: Show us, O Christ, Thy Resurrection!" (Sindoni kathara) once, slowly; "Glory... Both now and ever...": Tone 1: "The angelic choirs were astounded at the sight of Him Who rests in the bosom of the Father being laid in a tomb as a mortal..." (Exestesan choroi) likewise slowly. Footnote 48 notes that during this hymn the Great Archdeacon and deacons receive the blessing for the time [kairos], enter the Sanctuary, vest in their sacred vestments, and emerge holding the two-branched and three-branched candlesticks [dikirotrikira]. Psalm 50 LXX, followed by the monumental Canon of Great Saturday in Tone 6: "Of old the surge of the sea covered the pursuing tyrant beneath the waves; but the children of those who were saved bury beneath the earth Him Who was hidden: let us sing unto the Lord, for He is gloriously glorified!" (Kymati thalasses) by Mark the Monk and Saint Cosmas the Melodist for six Troparia, the Heirmos being repeated slowly at the end of each Ode as Katavasia. After Ode 3, the Sessional Hymn [Kathisma] in Tone 1: "Thy tomb, O Savior, the soldiers guarding became as dead men..." (Ton taphon sou Soter) once, slowly; Footnote 49 notes that at Ode 4 the Patriarch enters the Sanctuary and vests in complete hierarchical vestments with the concelebrating Hierarchs. After Ode 6, the Small Litany, the Kontakion in Tone 2: "He Who closed the abyss is beheld dead, and wrapped in fine linen and myrrh, the Immortal One is laid in a tomb as a mortal; and the women came to anoint Him with myrrh, weeping bitterly and crying aloud: This Sabbath is most blessed, in which Christ, having fallen asleep, shall rise again on the third day!" (Ten abysson ho kleisas); the Ikos; the Menologion; and the Triodion Memorial on the bodily burial of the Lord and His descent into Hades. Odes 7 and 8 of the Canon follow. The Deacon exclaims: "The Theotokos and Mother of the Light let us magnify in hymns!", and Ode 9 is chanted ("Weep not for Me, O Mother, beholding in the tomb the Son Whom without seed thou didst conceive in thy womb..."). At the conclusion of Ode 9, the Patriarch in full hierarchical vestments emerges from the Sanctuary preceded by the concelebrating Hierarchs; chanting the opening verse of the First Stasis of the Lamentations [Enkomia]: "Life in the tomb art Thou laid, O Christ, and the angelic hosts were astounded, glorifying Thy condescension" (He zoe en tapho), he advances toward the Epitaphios and censes it cross-wise, and afterward censes all the people. The Hierarchs, standing in choir formation, chant the verses of the First Stasis until the Patriarch returns to the throne; the opening Troparion is repeated. Small Litany with exclamation by the Patriarch: "For blessed is Thy Name, and glorified is Thy kingdom: of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.", and he begins the Second Stasis.

[^453]: Great and Holy Saturday: Matins of the Lamentations Continued (Stases II and III, Evlogitaria of the Resurrection, and Exaposteilarion) (§ 85 Continued). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p787 (printed page 772) and facing English leaf p788 (printed page 773). Paragraph 85 Continued: Great and Holy Saturday Matins: The Second Stasis of the Lamentations is chanted by the Patriarch and concelebrating Hierarchs: "It is right to magnify Thee, the Giver of life, Who wast lifted up upon the Cross and didst shatter the power of the enemy" (Axion esti megalynein se ton Zoodoten); at its conclusion, the first Troparion of this Stasis is repeated. The Small Litany follows, with the exclamation by the Patriarch: "For Holy art Thou, O our God, Who sittest upon the throne of glory of the Cherubim, and unto Thee we send up glory: together with Thine unoriginate Father, and Thy most holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.". The Patriarch and Hierarchs begin chanting the Third Stasis: "All generations offer a hymn unto Thy burial, O my Christ" (Hai geneai pasai hymnon te taphe sou prospherousi Christe mou). At the verse: "The myrrh-bearing women came early in the morning and sprinkled myrrh upon Thy tomb" (Erranan ton taphon hai Myrophoroi myra, lian proi elthousai), the Patriarch descends from the throne, receives a sprinkling vessel [kanion] from the Ecclesiarch, and singing this same Troparion (which is repeated three times), sprinkles the Epitaphios [Plashchanytsia] and the Tomb with rose-water [rhodostagma]. Upon the completion of the Third Stasis, its opening Troparion is repeated. The Small Litany follows, with the exclamation by the Patriarch: "For Thou art the King of peace, and the Savior of our souls, O Christ our God, and unto Thee we send up glory: together with Thine unoriginate Father, and Thine All-Holy, Good, and Life-giving Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.". The Patriarch and concelebrating Hierarchs immediately begin chanting the Evlogitaria of the Resurrection in Tone 5: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord: teach me Thy statutes! The assembly of the angels was amazed, beholding Thee numbered among the dead, yet destroying the power of death, O Savior, and with Thyself raising up Adam, and freeing all from Hades!..." (Eulogetos ei, Kyrie... Ton Angelon ho demos kateplage). When the Evlogitaria are completed, the Small Litany follows, with the exclamation by the Patriarch: "For all the powers of heaven praise Thee, and unto Thee they send up glory: to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.". Directly the Exaposteilarion in Tone 2 is chanted: "Holy is the Lord our God" (Hagios Kyrios ho Theos hemon) three times without additional Psalm verses. "Let every breath praise the Lord" (Psalm 150:6 LXX) and the Praises [Lauds] begin. Footnote 50 (noting Violakis's errant repetition of numeral 49) records the ceremonial action during the Praises: at the verse "Praise Him, all His angels; praise Him, all His hosts! To Thee, O God, is due a hymn!", the Patriarch descends from the throne, venerates the Epitaphios, blesses the congregation, and returns to the throne; while the remaining verses of the Praises are chanted, the concelebrating Hierarchs advance two by two, venerate the Epitaphios, and return to their stalls.

[^454]: Great and Holy Saturday: Matins Concluded (Praises Concluded, Solemn Epitaphios Procession, Prophecy, Epistle, Gospel, and Dismissal) (§ 85 Concluded). Detailed epigraphic synthesis of physical leaf p789 (printed page 774) and facing English leaf p790 (printed page 775). Paragraph 85 Concluded: The service of Great Saturday Matins concludes: At the Praises, four Stichera Idiomela are chanted: 1. "Today the tomb holds Him Who holds creation in the palm of His hand; a stone covers Him Who covered the heavens with virtue; Life sleeps and Hades trembles, and Adam is loosed from his bonds..." (Semeron synechei taphos); 2. "What is this sight that we behold? What is this present rest? The King of the ages, having accomplished the dispensation through His Passion, keeps Sabbath in the tomb..." (Ti to horomenon theama); 3. "Come, let us behold our Life lying in the tomb, that He may give life unto those lying in the tombs..." (Deute idomen ten zoen hemon); 4. "Joseph asked for the Body of Jesus, and laid It in his own new tomb; for it was fitting that He should come forth from a tomb as from a bridal chamber..." (Etesato Joseph to soma tou Iesou). "Glory...": Doxastikon in Tone 2: "This present day Moses mystically prefigured, saying: And God blessed the seventh day; for this is the blessed Sabbath, this is the day of rest, whereon the Only-Begotten Son of God rested from all His works..." (Ten semeron mystikos ho megas Moyses prodietypouto legon); "Both now and ever...": Theotokion in Tone 2: "Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos, for through Him Who became incarnate of thee, Hades is bound, Adam is recalled, the curse is annulled, Eve is set free, death is put to death, and we are given life..." (Hypereulogemene hyparcheis). The Great Doxology is chanted; at its conclusion, the slow melismatic Asmatikon: "Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us" (Hagios ho Theos) is sung by the choirs as the solemn Procession of the Epitaphios [Plashchanytsia] departs. Order of procession: the priests lead the way, followed by the chanters, and after them the Patriarch and concelebrating Hierarchs bearing the Epitaphios upon their heads; the procession exits through the western doors of the church and circles around the perimeter before returning. Upon re-entering the temple, the Patriarch enters the Sanctuary and proclaims: "Let us attend! Peace be unto all! Wisdom!". He chants the Dismissal Troparion in Tone 2: "When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal...", censing around the Holy Table processing before the Epitaphios; then the Troparia: "Unto the myrrh-bearing women..." and "The noble Joseph..."; the priests then reverently lay the Epitaphios upon the Holy Altar Table (Footnote 51* notes that ancient Typika prescribed only "The noble Joseph", while later custom prefixed the two Resurrectional Troparia). The Reader outside the iconostasis recites the Troparion of the Prophecy in Tone 2: "O Christ, Who holdest fast the ends of the earth, Thou didst deign to be held fast in a narrow tomb, that Thou mightest deliver mankind from the fall of Hades, and raising us up, immortalize us as the immortal God!" (Ho synechon ta perata); the Prokimenon in Tone 4: "Arise, O Lord, help us, and redeem us for Thy Name's sake!" (Ps. 43:26 LXX); the Prophecy: Ezekiel 37:1–14 LXX (The Vision of the Valley of Dry Bones: "Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will open your graves, O My people, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel"); the Epistle: 1 Corinthians 5:6–8 and Galatians 3:13–14 (Purging out the Old Leaven, Christ Our Passover Sacrificed for Us, and Redemption from the Curse of the Law); and the Gospel: Matthew 27:62–66 (The Chief Priests and Pharisees Seal the Sepulchre and Set the Guard) read by the Patriarch before the Royal Doors. After "Many years to you, Master!" (Eis polla ete), the Patriarch unvests from his hierarchical vestments (Footnote 52* notes that if Matins was anticipated at 7:00 p.m., the Patriarch does not unvest, but remains in the Sanctuary until the end to pronounce the Dismissal of the section), puts on his monastic mandya, takes his pastoral staff, and ascends the throne. The Archdeacon recites the Augmented Litany ("Let us all say with our whole soul...") and the Morning Litany ("Let us complete our morning prayer unto the Lord"). The Priest exclaims: "For Thine it is to show mercy and to save us, O Christ our God, and unto Thee we send up glory: to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.", and gives the Dismissal: "May Christ, our true God, Who for us men and for our salvation voluntarily endured His terrible Passions, the Cross, and voluntary entombment in the flesh, through the intercessions of His all-pure and blameless holy Mother, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for He is good and loves mankind", followed by "Through the prayers of our holy fathers...".
