[^271]: This typikon [order] was written by Bishop Basil Popovics of blessed memory, and circulated in our Eparchy on January 24, 1855, under No. 306.
[^272]: The procession around the church takes place thrice, with the exception of Great Friday (when the Plashchanytsia is carried around) and of Sunday Matins on Easter Sunday at midnight; for in these two cases it is necessary to encompass the church only once.
[^273]: Processions around the church take place from the right side unto the left, that is to say, after the manner of processions around the holy Altar-Table.
[^274]: At the Resurrection of Christ at midnight, when the circling around the church is performed only once, the Gospels are not read, but during the procession there is sung without fail the hymn: “Thy resurrection, O Christ Savior,” etc.
[^275]: The priest when administering the Holy Mysteries must keep before his eyes the following general rules: (α) At any time of day and night, if he is summoned to minister a Holy Mystery, he is to celebrate the Mystery without any delay, especially if necessity urgeth. — (β) If it should happen that he is in mortal sin, let him not celebrate the Mystery, but let him first confess his sins. If, however, there is no presbyter at that time, let him confess his sins before God in contrition of heart and thus celebrate the Mystery, and after this as soon as possible confess his sins. — (γ) When he ministereth the Holy Things, let him not minister without intention. The prayer of intention before ministering the Holy Mysteries he reciteth thus: “O God, Who of Thine unsearchable goodness hast established the Holy Mysteries, whereby man might restore unto himself the grace lost through sin, and of a child of the devil make himself a child of God and an heir of the kingdom of heaven: do Thou Thyself, the Worker of Thy works, perform through me this Mystery, which I desire to minister with such intention as Thy holy Church doth minister, and this in the name of the eternal Father, of the Son begotten of the Father before the ages, and of the Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son. Amen.” — (δ) For the celebration of each Mystery the priest is to vest in epitrachelion and phelonion, except only the Mystery of Repentance, which in necessity may even be performed without an epitrachelion. — (ε) Let him read all the words whereby the Holy Mystery is effected, and the other prayers aloud for all to hear, and not silently in the mind, from the Trebnik, keeping before his eyes the words of St. John Chrysostom who saith: “Let there be in his heart contrition, in his lips confession, and in his deed all humility.” — (ϛ) Finally, let him minister no Mystery in private places, but only in church, except in case of necessity or incidental requirement, or by permission received from the Hierarch. See *Trebnik*, Lviv, 1873, p. 2.
[^276]: Even before Baptism, when a child is born, the Church intends to impart a blessing immediately unto the woman who hath given birth, and therefore doth not even await her departure from the house and arrival into the temple of the Lord; but thither unto the place of birth comes the priest, and glorifies God that a human being hath been born, and soothes by prayers the pains endured by her in childbirth, blessing her and the child born of her; and these prayers whereby this is done are called “molitvanky” [birth-prayers], but among us these are for the most part not in use.
[^277]: The sponsors are to be only two, that is to say: a man and a woman. Let them not be unbelievers, heretics (Calvinists, Lutherans, or schismatics), burdened with an excommunication or suspension, nor fornicators, drunkards, open evil-doers, not possessing sufficient reason, understanding the Symbol of Faith [Creed], nor monks or nuns.
[^278]: If it is necessary to baptize conditionally, the formula is spoken thus: “If he is not baptized, the servant of God is baptized,” etc.; or: “If this person is capable, he is baptized,” etc.; or: “If thou art alive, he is baptized,” etc.
