=== LEAF p111 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Kontakia Chanted in the Liturgy (p. 96)]

96

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΩΝ ΕΝ ΤΗι ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑι ΨΑΛΛΟΜΕΝΩΝ

ΚΟΝΤΑΚΙΩΝ

40.    Τὰ ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ ἐνιαυτῷ καθ’ ὡρισμένας περιόδους ψαλλόμενα ἐν ταῖς Ἱεραῖς Λειτουργίαις Κοντάκια ἔχουσιν ὡς ἑξῆς. Ἀπὸ τῆς η΄ Νοεμβρίου μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῶν Εἰσοδίων ψάλλεται τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος Ναὸς τοῦ Σωτῆρος· τῇ παραμονῇ τῆς τῶν Εἰσοδίων ἑορτῆς, κἂν τύχῃ Κυριακή, ψάλλεται τὸ προεόρτιον Κοντάκιον Εὐφροσύνης σήμερον· ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Εἰσοδίων μέχρι τῆς παραμονῆς τῶν Χριστουγέννων, Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον τὸν προαιώνιον λόγον· τῇ θ΄ Δεκεμβρίου, τὸ Ἑορτάζει σήμερον ἡ οἰκουμένη· ἀπὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Χριστουγέννων μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον τὸν ὑπερούσιον τίκτει· τῇ α΄ Ἰανουαρίου, Ὁ τῶν ὅλων Κύριος περιτομὴν ὑπομένει· ἀπὸ τῆς β΄ Ἰανουαρίου μέχρι τῆς παραμονῆς τῶν Θεοφανείων, Ἐν τοῖς ρείθροις σήμερον τοῦ Ἰορδάνου· ἀπὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Θεοφανείων μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον τῇ οἰκουμένῃ· ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Θεοφανείων μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς, Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν· τῇ παραμονῇ τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς, τὸ προεόρτιον, Οὐράνιος χορός· ἀπὸ τῆς ἐνάρξεως τοῦ Τριῳδίου (ἐὰν ἀπεδόθη ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς), τὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου Κοντάκιον·¹³ ἀπὸ τῆς Α΄ Κυριακῆς τῶν Νηστειῶν μέχρι τῆς Ε΄ Κυριακῆς, τὸ Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ· τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, Ἡ πάντων χαρά· τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων, Τῷ θρόνῳ ἐν οὐρανῷ· τῇ Μ. Πέμπτῃ, Τὸν ἄρτον λαβὼν εἰς χεῖρας ὁ προδότης· {Μεταφραστοῦ Σημείωσις· Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἐπειδὴ τὴν Μ. Πέμπτην ψάλλομεν τὴν Λειτουργίαν τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου μετὰ ἑσπερινοῦ, Κοντάκια δὲν ψάλλονται εἰς τὴν Μικρὰν Εἴσοδον}· τῷ Μ. Σαββάτῳ Τὴν ἄβυσσον ὁ κλείσας {τὸ ἴδιον σχόλιον διὰ τὴν Λειτουργίαν μετ’ ἑσπερινοῦ τὸ ὁποῖον ἐγένετο διὰ τὴν Μ. Πέμπτην ἁρμόζει καὶ διὰ τὸ Μ. Σάββατον}· ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Πάσχα μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ κατῆλθες, ὅπερ ψάλλεται καὶ τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Θωμᾶ (ἀλλὰ τὰς λοιπὰς μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως ἡμέρας τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης ψάλλεται τὸ Τῇ φιλοπράγμονι δεξιᾷ), τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως,

---

13. Ἀλλ’ ἂν τύχῃ Ἁγίου ἑορταζομένου μνήμη ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ, πλὴν τῆς Κυριακῆς, κατὰ τὰς τρεῖς πρώτας ἑβδομάδας τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Κοντάκιον λέγεται τὸ Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, καθόσον καὶ Καταβασίαι λέγονται Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου.

*(Printed Page 96)*

=== LEAF p112 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Kontakia Chanted in the Liturgy (p. 97)]

97

CONCERNING THE KONTAKIA

CHANTED IN THE LITURGY

40.    Throughout the year at certain periods we sing certain Kontakia as follows. From November 8 until the Leave-taking {November 25} of the Feast of the Presentation of the Theotokos: "The most pure Temple of the Saviour." On the Eve of the Feast of the Presentation of the Theotokos, even if the Feast falls on a Sunday: the Kontakion of the Pre-feast "Filled with joy today." From the Leave-taking of the Feast of the Presentation of the Theotokos {November 26} until Christmas Eve {December 24}: "Today the Virgin is on her way to the cave." On December 9: "Today the universe rejoices." From the Feast of Christmas {December 25} until its Leave-taking {December 31}: "Today the Virgin gives birth." On January 1: "The Lord of all endures Circumcision," {Kontakion of the Circumcision}. From January 2 until the Eve of Epiphany {January 5}: "Today the Lord has appeared in the waters of the Jordan River," {the Kontakion of the Pre-feast of the Epiphany}. From the Feast of Epiphany {January 6} until its Leave-taking {January 14}: "Today You have appeared to the world, O Lord." From the Leave-taking of the Feast of Epiphany {January 15} until the Leave-taking of the Feast of the Presentation of the Lord {February 9}: "O Christ, our God, who through your birth have sanctified the virginal womb." On the Eve of the Presentation of the Lord {February 1}, the Kontakion of the Pre-feast: "A Heavenly choir." From the inauguration of the Triodion (if the Leave-taking of the Presentation of the Lord has already passed) we chant the Kontakion of the occurring Sunday of the Triodion.¹³ From the First Sunday of Lent until the Fifth Sunday of Lent: "To You, the Champion General." On the Saturday of Lazarus: "Christ, the Joy of All," On Palm Sunday: "O Christ God, enthroned in heaven." On Holy Thursday: "Judas the deceitful servant." {Translator's note: Please note that since we celebrate the Vesperal Liturgy of Saint Basil on Holy Thursday, Kontakia are not chanted at the Small Entrance.} On Holy Saturday: "He who closed the depth of the sea." {The same observation that was made concerning the Vesperal Liturgy of Holy Thursday applies also to that of Holy Saturday.} From Easter Sunday until its Leave-taking

---

13. If, however, there is a commemoration of a celebrating Saint on any other day except Sunday, during the first three weeks of the Triodion, the Kontakion "O Never-failing Protectress of Christians" is chanted, since also the Katavasia "I shall open my mouth" is performed.

*(Printed Page 97)*

=== LEAF p113 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Kontakia Chanted in the Liturgy (cont.) (p. 98)]

98

Τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς Νομικῆς· τῇ ἑορτῇ τῆς Ἀναλήψεως μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, Τὴν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν πληρώσας οἰκονομίαν· ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, Ὅτε καταβὰς· τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν ἁγίων Πάντων, Ὡς ἀπαρχὰς τῆς φύσεως· εἶτα ἔκτοτε μέχρι τῆς κζ΄ Ἰουλίου, τὸ Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν· τῇ β΄ Ἰουλίου, Περιβολὴν πᾶσι πιστοῖς ἀφθαρσίας· τῇ ἑορτῇ τῆς Κοιμήσεως τῆς ἁγίας Ἄννης, (Ἰουλίου κε΄) Προγόνων Χριστοῦ· ἀπὸ τῆς κζ΄ Ἰουλίου μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς Μεταμορφώσεως, Ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους μετεμορφώθης· τῇ α΄ Αὐγούστου, Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ· ἂν δὲ τύχῃ Κυριακή, πάλιν τὸ Ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους μετεμορφώθης· τῇ παραμονῇ τῆς Κοιμήσεως τῆς Θεοτόκου, Τῇ ἐνδόξῳ μνήμῃ σου· τῇ ιε΄ Αὐγούστου μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, Τὴν ἐν πρεσβείαις ἀκοίμητον Θεοτόκον· ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς Κοιμήσεως μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς Γεννήσεως τῆς Θεοτόκου, τὸ Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ Ἄννα· τῇ λα΄ Αὐγούστου, Τὴν θεοδόχον γαστέρα σου Θεοτόκε· τῇ α΄ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, Ὁ τῶν αἰώνων ποιητὴς καὶ Δεσπότης· τῇ παραμονῇ τῆς Γεννήσεως τῆς Θεοτόκου τὸ προεόρτιον, Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον καὶ Θεοτόκος Μαρία· τῇ ἑορτῇ τῶν ἐγκαινίων (ιγ΄ Σεπτεμβρίου) Οὐρανὸς πολύφωτος ἡ Ἐκκλησία· τῇ ἑορτῇ τῆς Ὑψώσεως τοῦ Σταυροῦ μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ· ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Σταυροῦ μέχρι τῆς η΄ Νοεμβρίου αὖθις τὸ Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν.

   Ἐν δὲ ταῖς καθημεριναῖς λειτουργίαις (ἐξαιρουμένων τῶν προεορτίων καὶ μεθεόρτων ἡμερῶν τῶν Δεσποτικῶν καὶ Θεομητορικῶν ἑορτῶν) Κοντάκια ψάλλονται τῇ μὲν Δευτέρᾳ Ἀρχιστράτηγοι Θεοῦ· τῇ δὲ Τρίτῃ Προφῆτα Θεοῦ καὶ Πρόδρομε· τῇ Τετάρτῃ Ὁ Ὑψωθείς· τῇ Πέμπτῃ Τοὺς ἀσφαλεῖς καὶ θεοφθόγγους κήρυκας· τῇ Παρασκευῇ Ὁ Ὑψωθείς· καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ Ὡς ἀπαρχὰς τῆς φύσεως· τῷ δὲ Σαββάτῳ τῶν ψυχῶν, Μετὰ τῶν Ἁγίων ἀνάπαυσον Χριστέ. Σημειωτέον

*(Printed Page 98)*

=== LEAF p114 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Kontakia Chanted in the Liturgy (cont.) (p. 99)]

99

we chant: "Immortal One, when You went down into the tomb." On the Sunday of Thomas: the same Kontakion as on Easter Sunday (but on the remaining days of this week until the Leave-taking of Thomas: "O Christ God, Thomas explored your vivifying side.") On the Wednesday of Mid-Pentecost until its Leave-taking: "At the mid-feast of the Law." From the Feast of the Ascension until its Leave-taking: "After fulfilling for us your plan of redemption." From the Sunday of Pentecost until its Leave-taking: "When the Most High came down." On the Sunday of All-Saints [the Sunday after Pentecost]: "To You, O Lord, Ordainer and Creator of the World." After the Sunday of All-Saints until July 26: "O Never-failing protection of Christians." On July 2: "O Pure One , whom God Himself has blessed." On the Feast of the Dormition of Saint Anna (July 25): "Of the Forefathers of Christ." From July 27 until the Leave-taking of the Transfiguration {August 13}: "O Christ God, you were transfigured on the Mountain," On August 1: "O Christ our God who chose of your own free will to be raised upon the cross"; but if the Feast occurs on a Sunday then again: "O Christ God, you were transfigured on the Mountain." On the Eve of the Dormition of the Theotokos {August 14}: "At your glorious commemoration." From August 15 until the Leave-taking {August 23}: "In intercessions the sleepless Theotokos." From the Leave-taking of the Dormition {August 24} until the Leave-taking of the Feast of the Nativity of the Theotokos {September 12}: "Joachim and Anna." On August 31: "Your God-containing womb." On September 1: "O Creator and Master of time and eternity" {Kontakion of the New Ecclesiastical Year}. On September 7 {Eve of the Nativity of the Theotokos}: "Today the Virgin and Theotokos Mary" {Kontakion of the Pre-feast}. On September 13 {Feast of the Consecration of the Church of the Resurrection}: "You have made of the Church a resplendent heaven" {Kontakion of the Consecration}. From September 14, Feast of the Exaltation of the Precious and Life-giving Cross, until its Leave-taking {September 21}: "O Christ our God, who chose of your own free will to be raised upon the cross." From the Leave-taking of the Cross {September 22} until November 8: Once again "O never failing protection of Christians."

   In the daily Liturgies (with the exception of Pre-feast and Post-feast days of either the Lord or the Theotokos) we chant the following Kontakia. On Monday: "O Arch-generals of God." On Tuesday: "O prophet of God and forerunner." On Wednesday: "O Christ our God, who chose of your own free will to be raised upon the cross." On Thursday: "Your infallible God-speaking preacher." On Friday: "O Christ our God, who chose of your own free will to be raised upon the cross." On Saturday:

*(Printed Page 99)*

=== LEAF p115 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Kontakia (cont.), Concerning the Trisagion Hymn, Concerning the Epistle and Gospel (p. 100)]

100

ὅτι ἐὰν ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ προλάβῃ τὴν ἑορτὴν τοῦ Ἀκαθίστου, τῇ Ε΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, Κοντάκιον ψάλλεται τὸ Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν. Ὅταν δὲ τύχῃ ὁ Εὐαγγελισμὸς τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, ἢ τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων, ἢ ταῖς πρώταις τέσσαρσιν ἡμέραις τῆς Μ. ἑβδομάδος, Κοντάκιον ψάλλεται τὸ Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, ὅταν δὲ τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα ἢ καὶ ἄλλῃ τῆς Διακαινησίμου ἑβδομάδος ἡμέρᾳ, τὸ Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΤΡΙΣΑΓΙΟΥ ΥΜΝΟΥ

41.    Ἐν ἑκάστῃ τελουμένῃ Λειτουργίᾳ (ἐξαιρουμένης τῆς τῶν Προηγιασμένων) ψάλλεται ὁ Τρισάγιος ὕμνος· ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἑξῆς Μ. Δεσποτικαῖς ἑορταῖς ἤτοι, ταῖς δυσὶν ἡμέραις τῆς τε ἑορτῆς τῶν Χριστουγέννων καὶ τῆς τῶν Θεοφανείων, τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, τῷ Μ. Σαββάτῳ, τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα, ὡς καὶ ἐν ὅλῃ τῇ Διακαινησίμῳ ἑβδομάδι, τῇ Ἀποδόσει τοῦ Πάσχα, τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς καὶ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τοῦ Ἁγίου Πνεύματος, ψάλλεται ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, ἐν δὲ τῇ ἑορτῇ τῆς Ὑψώσεως τοῦ Σταυροῦ καὶ τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Σταυροπροσκυνήσεως ψάλλεται Τὸν σταυρόν σου προσκυνοῦμεν Δέσποτα.

ΠΕΡΙ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΟΥ ΚΑΙ ΕΥΑΓΓΕΛΙΟΥ

42.    Συμπιπτούσης ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ μνήμης ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, Ἀπόστολος λέγεται τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς τῶν ἐφεξῆς Ἁγίων μνήμαις, ἤτοι τῶν τριῶν ἑορτῶν τοῦ Προδρόμου (τοῦ Γενεσίου, τῆς Συνάξεως καὶ τῆς Ἀποτομῆς), τῶν ἁγίων ἀποστόλων Πέτρου καὶ Παύλου, ὡς καὶ τῶν ΙΒ΄, τῶν τεσσάρων Εὐαγγελιστῶν Ματθαίου, Μάρκου, Λουκᾶ καὶ Ἰωάννου, τῶν ἁγίων Πατέρων τῆς Α΄, Δ΄ καὶ Ζ΄ Συνόδου, τῶν τριῶν Ἱεραρχῶν (ὅταν ἡ ἑορτὴ αὐτῶν μὴ συμπίπτῃ ἐντὸς τοῦ Τριῳδίου) Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται, καὶ ἐν Κυριακῇ ἔτι, τῶν Ἁγίων. Ἄν συμπέσωσι Κυριακῇ αἱ ἑξῆς Θεομητορικαὶ ἑορταί, ἤτοι τὰ

*(Printed Page 100)*

=== LEAF p116 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Kontakia (cont.), Concerning the Trisagios Hymn, Concerning the Epistle and Gospel (p. 101)]

101

"To You, O Lord, Ordainer and Creator of the World." On Saturdays of the Souls: "With the saints, O Lord, grant rest." Note that if the Feast of the Annunciation precedes the Feast of the Akathist Hymn, then on the Fifth Sunday of Lent we sing the Kontakion "O never-failing Protectress of Christians." When the Feast of the Annunciation occurs on the Saturday of Lazarus, Palm Sunday, or the first four days of Holy Week, the Kontakion is "To You the Champion General." If, however, the Feast falls on Easter Sunday or any day of Bright Week, then we chant the Kontakion "Immortal One, when You went down into the tomb," {This paragraph has been rendered obsolete by the adoption of the new calendar.}

CONCERNING THE TRISAGIOS HYMN

41.    At every Liturgy (with the exception of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts) the Trisagios Hymn {or Trisagion} is sung; on the following Great Feasts of the Lord, the two days of Christmas and Epiphany, the Saturday of Lazarus, Holy Saturday, Easter Sunday, as well as all of Bright Week, the Leave-taking of Pascha [Easter], the Sunday of Pentecost and Monday of the Holy Spirit, we sing instead of the Trisagion "As many as have been baptized into Christ." On the Feast of the Elevation of the Holy Cross and on the Sunday of the Veneration of the Cross, we chant "Your Cross we worship, Master."

CONCERNING THE EPISTLE AND THE GOSPEL

42.    When the commemoration of a Saint occurs on a Sunday, the Apostolos selection is that of the Saint, and the Gospel selection is that of the Sunday. On the following commemorations of Saints — the three Feasts of the Forerunner (Birth, Synaxis, and Beheading), the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, as well as the Twelve Apostles, the four Evangelists Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Holy Fathers of the First, Fourth and Seventh Synods, the Three Hierarchs (when their Feast does not occur within the Triodion period) — the Apostolos and Gospel selections, even on a Sunday, are those of the Saints. If the following Feasts of the Theotokos occur on a Sunday, that is, the Birth of the Theotokos, the Presentation of the Theotokos

*(Printed Page 101)*

=== LEAF p117 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Epistle and Gospel (cont.), Concerning the Alleluia of the Epistle (p. 102)]

102

Γενέσιον τῆς Θεοτόκου, ἡ Ὑπαπαντή, καὶ ὁ Εὐαγγελισμός, οἱ Ἀπόστολοι καὶ τὰ Εὐαγγέλια ὑπόκεινται εἴς τινας ἀλλοιώσεις ἀξιοσημειώτους· οἷον, διὰ τὸ Γενέσιον ἐν Κυριακῇ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τὰ τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως, διὰ τὸ μὴ εἶναι ἄλλην Κυριακὴν μεταξὺ τῆς ἑορτῆς ταύτης καὶ τῆς Ὑψώσεως τοῦ Σταυροῦ· διὰ τὴν Ὑπαπαντὴν ἐν Κυριακῇ, εἰ μέν ἐστιν ἔξω τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐν δὲ ἓν μιᾷ τῶν Κυριακῶν τοῦ Τριῳδίου, ἐν μὲν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ λέγεται τὸ τῆς Λειτουργίας Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐν δὲ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ ὁ Ἀπόστολος τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Διὰ τὸν Εὐαγγελισμόν, ἂν συμπέσῃ τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, Ἀπόστολος λέγεται τῆς Κυριακῆς, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἂν δὲ τῇ Δ΄ καὶ Ε΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἂν τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου ἢ τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων, ἐν μὲν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ λέγεται τὸ τῆς Λειτουργίας Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐν δὲ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ ὁ Ἀπόστολος τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας· ἄν τῇ Μ. Πέμπτῃ καὶ τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα, ἐν μὲν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ λέγεται τὸ τῆς Λειτουργίας Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐν δὲ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας· καὶ ἄν τῇ Δευτέρᾳ, τῇ Τρίτῃ ἢ τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Διακαινησίμου, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἐν τῇ Κοιμήσει τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ ἐν τῇ Ἀποδόσει, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται πάντοτε τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐν οἵᾳ ἂν ἡμέρᾳ τύχῃ.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ
ΑΛΛΗΛΟΥΙΑ ΤΟΥ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΟΥ

43.    Ἐν πάσαις ταῖς Ἱεραῖς Λειτουργίαις μετὰ τὴν ἀνάγνωσιν τοῦ Ἀποστόλου ψάλλεται τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα τρὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ β΄ Χοροῦ, τὸ δὲ Μέγα Σάββατον ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἀλληλούϊα μετὰ τὸν Ἀπόστολον εὐθὺς ὁ Ἱερεὺς ἔσωθεν τοῦ Ἁγίου Βήματος ψάλλει τὸ Μ. Προκείμενον τῆς Ἀναστάσεως Ἀνάστα ὁ Θεὸς κρίνων τὴν γῆν εἰς ἦχον βαρύν, ὃ ἐπαναλαμβάνεται καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν Χορῶν μεχρισοῦ πληρωθῶσιν οἱ Στίχοι τοῦ ΠΑ΄ ψαλμοῦ· τὸ δὲ παραλείπειν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ταῖς λοιπαῖς τῆς Διακαινησίμου Ἑβδομάδος ἡμέραις μετὰ τὸν Ἀπόστολον καὶ τὸ Κοινωνικὸν τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα, οὐδαμοῦ τῶν ἀρχαίων Τυπικῶν εὕρηται, ἀλλὰ τοὐναντίον εἰς τὸ τέλος ἑκάστου τῶν Ἀποστόλων τῆς

*(Printed Page 102)*

=== LEAF p118 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Epistle and Gospel (cont.), Concerning the Alleluia of the Epistle (p. 103)]

103

in the Temple, and the Annunciation, the Apostolos and Gospel selections are subject to the following noteworthy changes: for the Birth of the Theotokos occuring on a Sunday, the Apostolos and Gospel selections are those of the Sunday before the Elevation of the Cross, since there is not another Sunday between this Feast and the Elevation of the Cross; for the Presentation of the Lord in the Temple occurring on a Sunday, if the Feast is outside of the Triodion period, the Apostolos and Gospel selections are those of the Feast; if, however, the feast occurs on one of the Sundays of the Triodion, the Gospel of the Feast from the Liturgy is read at Matins, while in the Liturgy are recited the Apostolos selection of the Feast and the Gospel selection of the Sunday of the Triodion. For the Annunciation, if the Feast coincides with the Third Sunday of Lent, the Apostolos selection is that of the Sunday and the Gospel is that of the Annunciation; if the Feast coincides with the Fourth or Fifth Sunday of Lent, both the Apostolos and Gospel selections are those of the Feast; if the Feast falls on the Saturday of Lazarus or on Palm Sunday, at Matins we recite the Gospel of the Feast from the Liturgy while in the Liturgy the Apostolos selection of the Feast and the Gospel of the day are recited; if the Feast coincides with Holy Thursday or the Sunday of Pascha [Easter], at Matins the Feast's Gospel from the Liturgy is recited, while in the Liturgy the Apostolos and Gospel of the day are recited. If the Feast falls on Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday of Bright Week, the Apostolos and Gospel are those of the Feast. On the Feast and the Leave-taking of the Dormition of the Theotokos, no matter on what day of the week it occurs, the Apostolos and Gospel are always those of the Feast.

CONCERNING
THE ALLELUIA OF THE EPISTLE

43.    In all the Divine Liturgies, after the reading of the Apostolos, "Alleluia" is sung three times by the Second Choir. On Holy Saturday, instead of "Alleluia," after the Apostolos, the Priest, from inside the Holy Vima [Sanctuary] immediately sings the Great Prokimenon of the Resurrection "Arise O God and judge Thou the earth" in Mode Varys, which is repeated by both Choirs until all the Verses of Psalm 81 have been chanted. The omission on Pascha [Easter] and on the rest of the days of Bright Week of the "Alleluia" after the Apostolos and of the Kinonikon is not found in any of the texts of the ancient Typika, but just the opposite: at the end of every Apostolos of this week is found written the "Alleluia" three times

*(Printed Page 103)*

=== LEAF p119 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Cherubic Hymn, Concerning "It is Meet and Right" (p. 104)]

104

τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου μνήμη τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς τοῦ Θωμᾶ ἑορτῆς, καὶ τῇ ἑορτῇ ἢ Ἀποδόσει τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, ὅτε ψάλλεται ἡ Καταβασία τῆς Θ΄ ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΧΕΡΟΥΒΙΚΟΥ ΥΜΝΟΥ

44.    Ἐν ἑκάστῃ Λειτουργίᾳ τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου ἢ τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου ψάλλεται ὁ Χερουβικὸς Ὕμνος τὸ Οἱ τὰ Χερουβίμ, ἀλλὰ τὴν Μ. Πέμπτην καὶ τὸ Μ. Σάββατον καίτοι τελεῖται ἡ αὐτὴ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, ὑπάρχει ὡς πρὸς τοῦτο διαφορὰ διότι τῇ μὲν Μ. Πέμπτῃ ἀντὶ τοῦ Οἱ τὰ Χερουβὶμ ψάλλεται τὸ Τροπάριον Τοῦ δείπνου σου τοῦ μυστικοῦ, τῷ δὲ Μ. Σαββάτῳ τὸ Σιγησάτω πᾶσα σὰρξ βροτεία. Ἐὰν ἡ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ ἑορτὴ τύχῃ τῇ Μ. Πέμπτῃ, τελεῖται μὲν ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, ψάλλεται ὅμως τὸ Τοῦ δείπνου σου τοῦ μυστικοῦ. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἱεραῖς Λειτουργίαις τῶν Προηγιασμένων ψάλλεται πάντοτε τὸ Νῦν αἱ δυνάμεις.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΑΞΙΟΝ ΕΣΤΙΝ

45.    Ἐν ἑκάστῃ Λειτουργίᾳ τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, καθ’ οἱανδήποτε καὶ ἂν τελῆται ἡμέραν, ἐν πάσαις ταῖς Κυριακαῖς καὶ ταῖς μεθεόρτοις Κυριακαῖς τῶν Δεσποτικῶν καὶ Θεομητορικῶν ἑορτῶν, ὡς καὶ ἐν ταῖς μνήμαις τῶν ἐν τῷ μεταξὺ τῶν μεθεόρτων ἑορταζομένων Ἁγίων, καθ’ ἃς ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως ψάλλεται τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν. Ἐν ταῖς Δεσποτικαῖς καὶ Θεομητορικαῖς ἑορταῖς καὶ ταῖς ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ Ἀποδόσεσιν αὐτῶν, ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν ψάλλεται ἡ Καταβασία τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδῆς τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τοῦ Μεγαλυναρίου. Τῇ ἑορτῇ τῆς Μεταμορφώσεως ἀντὶ τῆς Καταβασίας τῆς Θ΄ Ὁ τόκος σου ἄφθορος ἐδείχθη εἴθισται (καίτοι οὐδὲν τοιοῦτον σημειοῖ τὸ ἀρχαῖον Τυπικὸν) ψάλλεσθαι τὸ ἐν τῇ Ζ΄ Ὠδῇ Τροπάριον Νῦν τὰ ἀνήκουστα ἠκούσθη. Ἐν ταῖς τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου Λειτουργίαις ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν ψάλλεται τὸ Κάθισμα Ἐπὶ σοὶ χαίρει Κεχαριτωμένη.
   Σημειωτέον δὲ ὅτι, ἐν ταῖς μνήμαις τῶν Ἁγίων ταῖς συμπιπτούσαις μετὰ τὴν Κυριακὴν τοῦ Θωμᾶ μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Πάσχα ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν τῆς Κυριακῆς, ψάλλεται μετὰ τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστι καὶ οὐχὶ τὸ Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, ὅπερ μόνον ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς καθιέρωται ἤδη· διότι ἐν αὐταῖς οὐδὲ τὸ Τὴν

*(Printed Page 104)*

=== LEAF p120 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Cherubic Hymn, Concerning "It is Meet and Right" (p. 105)]

105

together with its verses — and the Choirs are obliged to sing it.

CONCERNING THE CHERUBIC HYMN

44.    In every Liturgy of Chrysostom or Basil the Great, the Cherubic Hymn "We who image the Cherubim" is sung, but on Holy Thursday and Holy Saturday, even though the Liturgy of Basil the Great is celebrated, the following differences exist: on Holy Thursday, instead of "We who image the Cherubim," the Hymn "Your mystical supper" is sung. On Holy Saturday, we chant "Let all mortal flesh keep silent." If the Feast of the Annunciation falls on Holy Thursday, the Liturgy of Chrysostom is celebrated, but the Hymn "Your mystical supper" is sung. In the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, we always chant "Now the powers of the heavens."

CONCERNING "IT IS MEET AND RIGHT"

45.    In every Liturgy of Chrysostom, no matter on which day it is celebrated, on all Sundays and Post-feast Sundays of Feasts of the Lord and Theotokos, as well as on the commemorations of celebrating Saints occurring during the Post-feasts, in which "More honorable" is chanted in Matins, at "Especially" we sing "It is meet and right." On Feasts of the Lord and Theotokos and their Leave-takings, if they fall on Sundays, instead of "It is meet and right," the Katavasia of the Ninth Ode of the Feast along with its Megalynarion is sung. On the Feast of the Transfiguration, instead of the Katavasia of the Ninth Ode, "Your birthgiving was undefiled," it is now the custom (even though the ancient Typikon makes no mention of this) to sing the Hymn from the Seventh Ode "Now the unheard of has been heard." In the Liturgies of Basil the Great, instead of "It is meet and right," the Kathisma "All the creation rejoices in You" is chanted.

   Note that, on the commemorations of Saints occurring after the Sunday of Thomas until the Leave-taking of Pascha [Easter] on any day except Sunday, at "Especially" we sing "It is meet and right" and not "The Angel cried out," which has already been ordained to be chanted on Sundays, since on these days we do not sing [at Matins] the "More

*(Printed Page 105)*
