=== LEAF p481 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XIII Concl. (§ 38) and Apodosis (§ 39) (p. 466)]

466

38.    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος, τὸ
Ἀλληλούϊα μετὰ τῶν Στίχων Ἐκ νυκτὸς ὀρθρίζει τὸ πνεῦμά μου, τὸ
ψαλτήριον, τὰ κατανυκτικὰ Καθίσματα τῆς Ὀκτωήχου, καὶ τὰ τοῦ
Τριῳδίου, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς, ἡ Στιχολογία τῶν Θ΄ Ὠδῶν καὶ ὁ προεόρτιος
Κανὼν Ὁ Κόσμος περιχαρῶς, ἡ α΄ καὶ γ΄ Ὠδή, ἡ Αἴτησις καὶ τὸ
προεόρτιον Κάθισμα τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς Σήμερον ἅπασα, ἡ δ΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ
Τριῳδίου μετὰ τὴν δ΄ τοῦ Προεορτίου, καὶ ἡ ε΄ καὶ στ΄ τοῦ αὐτοῦ·
ὁ Εἱρμός, ἡ Αἴτησις, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἐπελεύσει Πνεύματος καὶ τὸ
Μηνολόγιον· εἶτα οἱ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ Μακαρισμοὶ καὶ τοῦ προεορτίου
Κανόνος ἡ ζ΄ Ὠδή, ὡς καὶ ἡ η΄ καὶ θ΄ καὶ αἱ τοῦ Τριῳδίου η΄ καὶ θ΄,
Αἰνοῦμεν, εὐλογοῦμεν, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου, καὶ μετὰ
Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ὡς δῶρα προεόρτια, τὸ
Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει· μετὰ τὴν Ἐκτενῆ, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ταῖς λῃ-
στρικαῖς ἐφόδοις δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ ἔγνω, τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς Παγκοσμίου, τὸ Κύριε
ἐλέησον μ΄. Ὁ ὢν εὐλογητός, ἡ εὐχὴ Ἐπουράνιε Βασιλεῦ
καὶ αἱ Ὧραι λιταί, λεγομένων ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ἀπολυτικίου καὶ
Κοντακίου Προεορτίων, μετὰ τὴν εὐχὴν τῆς στ΄ Ὥρας, Ἀπόλυσις.

    Τῇ αὐτῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας, ὁ Μέγας Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ τὸ πρωῒ
ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου
ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

39.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτή, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν
περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 18. Μετὰ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις ψάλλεται Τὸ προσταχθὲν
μυστικῶς ἀργῶς δίς, καὶ τὸ γ΄ σύντομον καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ α΄
Στάσις τῶν Οἴκων, εἶτα ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα
μου εἰς ς΄· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ψάλλεται τὸ Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ ἀργῶς καὶ
ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ β΄ Στάσις, ἔπειτα ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ Χορὸς τὴν δ΄ τοῦ
Κανόνος Ὠδήν· μετὰ τὴν ς΄ Ὠδήν, τὸ Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ σύντομον
καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ γ΄ τῶν Οἴκων Στάσις, ἀκολούθως ψάλλεται ἡ
ζ΄, η΄ καὶ θ΄ τοῦ Κανόνος Ὠδή, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς θ΄ ὁ α΄ Χορὸς Τῇ
ὑπερμάχῳ σύντομον, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον
τῆς σωτηρίας ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 466)*

=== LEAF p482 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Thirteen Concl. (§ 38) and The Leave-taking (§ 39) (p. 467)]

467

38.    On Thursday morning after the Midnight Service, the Exapsalmos,
"Alleluia" with the Verses "My spirit seeks You," the Psalter, the
penitential Kathismata of the Octoichos, and those of the Triodion. Then
Psalm 50, the chanting of the 9 Odes and the Canon of the Pre-feast "The
universe joyously," the 1st and 3rd Odes, the Petition and the Kathisma of
the 3rd Ode of the Pre-feast "Today all," then the 4th Ode of the Triodion,
and the 4th, 5th and 6th Odes of the Pre-feast; the Irmos, the Petition, the
Kontakion "Through the descent of the Holy Spirit" and the Minologion;
then the Beatitudes in the Triodion and the 7th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-
feast, the 8th and 9th Odes of the Pre-feast, and the 8th and 9th Odes of the
Triodion. Then "We praise, bless and worship the Lord" and the Irmos of
the 8th Ode of the Triodion; following "More honorable," the Exapostilarion
"As pre-festal gifts," "To You belongs glory" and following the Ektcnis the
Idiomelon of the Aposticha "Into the bushes of thieves" twice and the
Hymn to the Martyrs; Glory, Now and ever, "The language I knew not."
Then, "It is a good thing to give thanks to the Lord," the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion "Today is the prelude of joy," "Lord, have mercy" (40 times).
Then "The one who is blessed," "O heavenly King," and the Hours are read,
with the Apolytikion and Kontakion of the Pre-feast recited in each one of
the Hours; after the Prayer of the 6th Hour, the Dismissal.
    That Thursday evening, the Great Vespers; in the morning (Friday)
the Matins of the Feast with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are chanted as
prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3 -5.

The Leave-taking

39.    On Friday evening, we celebrate the Leave-taking of the Feast as
prescribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 18. After "Lord, now let your
servant," we sing "Taking knowledge of the secret command" twice
slowly and at a quicker tempo the third time, and then the First Stasis of the
Iki is read. Then we sing the Canon "I shall open my mouth" to the end of
the Third Ode, then "To the Champion General" (slowly) and the Second
Stasis of the Iki is read. Then the Second Choir begins the 4th Ode of the
Canon. After the 6th Ode, "To the Champion General" is sung at a fast pace
and the Third Stasis of the Iki is read. Then the 7th, 8th and 9th Odes of the
Canon are sung. After the 9th Ode, the First Choir (right) sings "To the
Champion General" at a fast pace and the Fourth Stasis is read, immedi-
ately "To the Champion General" (at a fast pace), the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion "Today marks the crowning of our salvation" (3 times), and
Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 467)*

=== LEAF p483 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XIII Saturday of the Akathist (§§ 40–41, Note) and Situation XIV Opening (§ 42) (p. 468)]

468

40.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, Τὸ
προσταχθὲν μυστικῶς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ
Τροπάριον Τὸ προσταχθὲν δὶς [πιθανὸν τυπογραφικὸν λάθος διότι τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον μίας μόνον ἑορτῆς ψάλλεται τρεῖς φορὲς σχεδὸν
πάντοτε, π.χ. τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ, τῶν Θεοφανείων, τῶν Χριστουγέννων,
τοῦ Σαββάτου τοῦ Λαζάρου, τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς], καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον [τὸ
16ον Κάθισμα], τὸ ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα Ὁ μέγας Γαβριὴλ καὶ ἕτερον
Τῶν ᾀσμάτων [ὀρθότερον ἀσωμάτων] λειτουργῶν [ζήτει τῇ 26ῃ
Μαρτίου], ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ὁ Κανὼν Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ὁ τοῦ
Ἀρχαγγέλου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Ὁ μέγας στρατηγὸς [ζήτει
εἰς τὴν ἑορτήν]· ἐν τῇ ς΄ Ὠδῇ λέγονται καὶ τὰ Μαρτυρικὰ Τριῴ-
δια ὡς καὶ ἐν τῇ ζ΄, η΄ καὶ θ΄· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ
καὶ ὁ Οἶκος Ἄγγελος πρωτοστάτης, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας
καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Ἀκαθίστου· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ
στόμα μου καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Καταβασία
Ἅπας γηγενής. Ἐξαποστειλάριον Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος σήμερον
δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια Κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον
εἰς δ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ ἔγνω, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη
καὶ Τὸ προσταχθὲν μυστικῶς.
41.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια
ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Θεοτόκου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον
Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, Τὸ προσταχθὲν,
τὸ Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, Ἀπόστολος Εἶχεν ἡ πρώτη σκηνή, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον
Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἅπας γηγενής. Κοινωνικὸν
Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

    Σημ. Ἡ ἀνωτέρω τυπικὴ διάταξις τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τῆς
ἑορτῆς διετάχθη ἐν ἔτει ,αωλβ΄ (ἐπὶ τῆς Πατριαρχείας Κωνσταντίνου
τοῦ Α΄), καθ᾿ ὃ συνέπεσεν ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ τῇ Παρασκευῇ
τῆς Ε΄ ἑβδομάδος, καὶ ἔκτοτε ἐκανονίσθη οὕτω,

ΙΔ΄.

42.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Ἀκαθίστου, τῇ Πέμπτῃ
πρωῒ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον
[Τὸ Πρὸς Κύριον εἶναι τὸ 18ον Κάθισμα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, ἀλλὰ

*(Printed Page 468)*

=== LEAF p484 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Thirteen Concl. (§§ 40–41, Note) and Situation Fourteen Opening (§ 42) (p. 469)]

469

40.    Saturday at Matins, following the Midnight Service, "Taking
knowledge of the secret command" and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the
Lord": the Hymn "Taking knowledge of the secret command" (twice)
{This may be an error, since almost always the Apolytikion of a single feast
is sung three times, e.g., Annunciation, Epiphany, Christmas, the Saturday
of Lazarus, Pentecost} and the Psalter {the 16th Kathisma}. After the 3rd
Ode, the Kathisma "The great Gabriel" and "Of the incorporeal liturgists"
{these will be found in March 26}, Psalm 50, the Canon "I shall open my
mouth" and that of the Archangel; after the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma "The
great general" (see the Feast of the Annunciation); at the 6th Ode, we add
also the Triodion Canons of the Martyrs as well as at the 7th, 8th and 9th
Odes. After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion "To the Champion General" and
the Ikos "A chief angel was sent," the Minologion of the day and the
Postscript of the Akathist. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth" and
"More honorable" with its verses. Then the Katavasia "Let every mortal
born on earth." Exapostilarion "The mystery hidden from all ages"
(twice). At the Praises: the Prosomia "A hidden mystery," (in 4, i.e., repeat
the first), Glory, Now and ever, "The language I knew not," Great
Doxology and "Taking knowledge of the secret command."
41.    In the Liturgy, the Typika (Psalms 102 and 145) and the Beatitudes.
With the Beatitudes we sing 4 hymns from the Third Ode and 4 hymns from
the Sixth Ode of the Canon of the Theotokos. At the Entrance: "O come
let us worship . . . who is wondrous in His saints," "Taking knowledge of
the secret command," "To the Champion General." Apostolos "The first
part of the tent" {Hebrews 9:1-7}, and the Gospel "Mary arose" {Luke
2:39 - 49, 56}. At "Especially," "Let every mortal born on earth,"
Communion Hymn "I will receive the cup of salvation," "We have seen the
[true] light," and Dismissal.
    Note: The above order of the Service of the Feast, was first ordained
in 1832 (during the Patriarchate of Constantine the First), when the Feast
of the Annunciation occurred on the Friday of the 5th week, and since then
it has been established to be celebrated in this manner.

SITUATION FOURTEEN

42.    If the Feast occurs on Saturday of the Akathist, Thursday morning
at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the "To the Lord" {the "To the
Lord" is the 18th Kathisma of the Psalter (Psalms 119 - 133 [LXX])};

*(Printed Page 469)*

=== LEAF p485 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XIV Cont. (§§ 42–43) (p. 470)]

470

καταχώρησις τῶν ἀναγνωσμάτων εἰς τὴν Ε΄ ἑβδομάδα ὅπως
εὑρίσκεται εἰς τὸ Ψαλτήριον ὑποδεικνύει ὅτι μᾶλλον τὸ 12ον
Κάθισμα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου πρέπει νὰ διαβασθῇ εἰς αὐτὸ τὸ σημεῖον]·
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Αὐτεξουσίως ἐξεδύθην
δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν (Μάρτυρες Κυρίου) ἅπαξ, τὰ τῆς σειρᾶς
τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ Προσόμοια (Ἠλούμενος, Κύριε, Σταυρῷ,
Νηστείας λαμπρότητι ποτέ, καὶ Τὸν ζωοποιὸν προσκυνοῦντές
σου Σταυρόν,) καὶ τὰ δ΄ Προεόρτια [τὸ ὅλον 10 Στιχηρά]. Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ
τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ
Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.

    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωΐ, ὁ Ὄρθρος καὶ αἱ Ὧραι ἀναγινώσκονται
ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2. Μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας,
Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς ψάλλεται ὡς
διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3.
43.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
ἐκ τρίτου, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν
τὸ α΄ καὶ τὸ τελευταῖον ἐκ δευτέρου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον
τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, τὸ
Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, Δόξα,
Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ
τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, τὸ Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν
σου, καὶ μετὰ τὸ Ἐλέει καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς ψάλλεται ἀργῶς τὸ Τῇ
ὑπερμάχῳ, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ α΄ Στάσις τῶν Οἴκων· μετὰ τὸ
τέλος, αὖθις τὸ Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, ἀργοσύντομον, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται
ἡ β΄ Στάσις, εἶτα ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς ἕξ, μετὰ τὴν γ΄ Ὠδήν
Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ γ΄ Στάσις, εἰς τὸ τέλος ἡ
Αἴτησις καὶ ψάλλεται τὸ Κάθισμα Ὁ λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ τὸ
Ἀπεστάλη Γαβριήλ, εἶτα ἡ δ΄, ε΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Κανόνος καὶ
μετὰ τὴν Καταβασίαν τῆς ς΄ Ἐβόησε προτυπῶν, Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ
, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ δ΄ τῶν Οἴκων Στάσις, ἡ Αἴτησις, τὸ
Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου,
εἶτα ἡ ζ΄ καὶ η΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Κανόνος, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Καταβασίαν τῆς
η΄ Ὠδῆς Ἄκουε Κόρη (Παρθένε ἁγνή), Τὴν Θεοτόκον καὶ

*(Printed Page 470)*

=== LEAF p486 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Fourteen Cont. (§§ 42–43) (p. 471)]

471

however, the division of readings for the Fifth Week of Lent, as presented
in the Psalter, indicates that the 12th Kathisma of the Psalter (Psalms 85 -
90 [LXX]) should be read instead at this point}, at "Lord, I have cried" we
chant the Idiomelon "Of my own free will" (twice), and the hymn to the
Martyrs {"O martyrs of the Lord"} (once), then the 3 Prosomia ["Nailed,
O Lord," "Shining with the radiance of fasting" and "We venerate Your
life-giving Cross"] then three Stichira of the Pre-feast repeating the first,
from the order of the Triodion [thus a total of 10 Stichira are done]; Glory,
Now and ever, "Gabriel announces." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and
the Readings of the day {Genesis 18:20-33; Proverbs 16:17 - 17:17}. Then
the "Let my prayer arise," and then follows the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified
Gifts.
    On Friday morning, Matins and the Hours are read as prescribed in
Situation One, Paragraph 2. After the Prayer of the 6th Hour, the Dismissal.
    That Friday evening, Great Vespers is chanted as prescribed in
Situation One, Paragraph 3.1
43.    On Saturday at Matins, "Blessed is our God," the Trisagion, Psalm
50, the Liti, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At
"God is the Lord": the Apolytikion (three times), the Psalter and the
Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the first and the last twice each, the
Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon "Proclaim
from day to day." Then "Let everything that has breath" and the Gospel
"Mary arose" {Luke 1:39-46, 56}, Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "Through the
intercessions of the Theotokos," Now and ever, repeat the same, the Verse
"Have mercy upon me, O God" and the Idiomelon "Gabriel announces
today," "O God, save Your people"; and after "Through the mercy," "To
the Champion General," is sung slowly and the First Stasis of the Iki is
read, then "To the Champion General," at a slightly quicker tempo and the
Second Stasis is read; then the Canon of the Feast in six. After the Third
Ode, we sing "To the Champion General," and the Third Stasis is read. At
the end, the Petition and the Kathisma "The Word of God" and "Gabriel
was sent" are sung, then the 4th, 5th and 6th Odes of the Canon, and after
the Katavasia of the 6th Ode "Prefiguring Your three day burial," we sing
"To the Champion General," and the Fourth Stasis of the Iki is read. The
Petition, the Kontakion, the Ikos, the Minologion and the Postscript of the
Triodion, then the 7th and 8th Ode of the Canon, and after the Katavasia of
the 8th Ode "Hearken, O {pure Virgin} Maid," we recite "The Mother of
God" and the 9th Ode "O Earth, announce good tidings of great joy... As

*(Printed Page 471)*

=== LEAF p487 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XIV Concl. (§ 43), Apodosis (§§ 44–45), and Situation XV Opening (§ 46) (p. 472)]

472

ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ χαρὰν μεγάλην . . . Ὡς
ἐμψύχῳ θεοῦ, εἶτα τὰ δύο Ἐξαποστειλάρια. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
τὰ Προσόμοια Τῶν οὐρανίων ἁψίδων εἰς δ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸ
ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, καὶ
καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν
περιπτώσει Α΄ § 5.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

44.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ
τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῆς
ἑορτῆς γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου γ΄· Δόξα, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ,
Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ
νῦν, Εὐφραινέσθωσαν οἱ οὐρανοί, Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ
τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Ὁσίας ψάλλεται
ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις.
45.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ
Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ
ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ
Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ
Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα Τῶν
ἀσωμάτων λειτουργῶν (ζήτει τῇ ΚΣΤ΄), ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος,
τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ
Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς
τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν
Τὴν Τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὰ δύο
τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου
δ΄ (ἐνταῦθα ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτή). Δόξα, Οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ βασιλεία
τοῦ θεοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. Σήμερον
σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, ψαλλομένων
τῶν Τυπικῶν καὶ τῶν Μακαρισμῶν ὡς εἴθισται.

ΙΕ΄.

46.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Ε΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῇ Παρασκευῇ
πρωῒ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον,

*(Printed Page 472)*

=== LEAF p488 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Fourteen Concl. (§ 43), The Leave-taking (§§ 44–45), and Situation Fifteen Opening (§ 46) (p. 473)]

473

a live ark of God" is sung; then the two Exapostilaria. At the Praises: the
Prosomia "Gabriel flew down from the vault of heaven" in 4 (repeat the
first), Glory, Now and ever, "Today is revealed the mystery before all
time," Great Doxology, the Apolytikion, and immediately the Liturgy of
Chrysostom takes place, as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 5.

The Leave-taking

44.    On Saturday at Vespers following the Introductory Psalm and the
Psalter at "Lord, I have cried" 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Feast
and 3 of the Archangel. Glory, "Sent from heaven," Now and ever the first
Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the
Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and
ever, "Let the heavens rejoice." The Apolytikia of the Resurrection (once)
and of the Feast (twice) and Dismissal. The Service of Saint Mary of Egypt
is celebrated at Compline.
45.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the
Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and
the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as at Vespers, the
Psalter of the day, and the Amomos; the Resurrection Kathismata and one
of the Feast; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and
the Prokimenon. Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast. At the 3rd
Ode, the Kathisma "Of the incorporeal liturgists" (see the 26th of the
month); at the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the
Minologion of the day and of the Triodion. The Katavasie "I shall open my
mouth" and the entire order of the Sunday Matins Gospel as prescribed in
the Triodion; then "More honorable." Exapostilaria of the Resurrection
and the two of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 of the Resurrection and 4 of the
Archangel (at which point the Leave-taking of the Feast occurs), Glory,
"The Kingdom of God is not food and drink," Now and ever, "Most
blessed," Great Doxology, "Today salvation," and the Liturgy of Basil the
Great is celebrated. The Typika and the Beatitudes are sung as is customary.

SITUATION FIFTEEN

46.    If the Feast occurs on the 5th Sunday of Lent, Friday morning at
Vespers after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have

*(Printed Page 473)*

=== LEAF p489 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XV Cont. (§§ 46–48) (p. 474)]

474

εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ὡς ἐξ Ἰερουσαλὴμ δίς,
τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, καὶ τὰ Βουλὴν προαιώνιον ἀνὰ μίαν· Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ
τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ
Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.

    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται, μετὰ μικροῦ Ἀποδείπνου, ὁ Ἀκάθιστος
Ὕμνος, ὡς εἴθισται. [Κοντάκιον μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον Ἐπελεύσει
πνεύματος. Αὐτὸ δὲν εὑρίσκεται εἰς τὴν παροῦσαν παράγραφον
τοῦ Τυπικοῦ, ἀλλὰ ἀναφέρεται εἰς παρομοίαν περίπτωσιν ὅταν ἡ
ἑορτὴ τυγχάνει τῇ 4ῃ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν. Ὅρα §26. Ἑπομένως,
πρέπει νὰ εἰσαχθῇ ἐδῶ διὰ τὴν διευκόλυνσιν τοῦ ἀναγνώστου.]
47.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, τὸ Τρισάγιον κτλ. ὁ Ν΄
ψαλμός, Τὸ προσταχθὲν μυστικῶς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος Τὸ προσταχθὲν δίς, καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον (Ἀπολυτίκιον), τὸ
Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου Κάθισμα Ὁ
μέγας στρατηγὸς δίς, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Ἀκαθίστου
Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος Ὁ κόσμος περιχαρῶς
εὐφράνθητι, οὗ ὁ Στίχος Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ
προεόρτιον Κοντάκιον χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Σήμερον ἅπασα (ἰδὲ
Μαρτίου 24). (Εἰς τὴν ς΄ Ὠδήν, ὡς καὶ τὴν ζ΄, η΄ καὶ θ΄ συμφάλλονται
καὶ τὰ Τριῴδια τῶν Μαρτύρων)· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον Τῇ
ὑπερμάχῳ καὶ ὁ Οἶκος Ἄγγελος πρωτοστάτης, τὸ Μηνολόγιον,
καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Ἀκαθίστου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα
μου, καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια Τὸ ἀπ᾿
αἰῶνος σήμερον, καὶ τὸ προεόρτιον Ὡς δῶρα προεόρτια. Εἰς
τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια Κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον. Δόξα, Καὶ
νῦν, Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ᾿ ἔγνω, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς Παγκοσμίου.
48.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ μετὰ τῶν
Τροπαρίων ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ προεορτίου Κανόνος. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, Τὸ προσταχθὲν μυστικῶς, τὸ προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον
Σήμερον τῆς Παγκοσμίου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον
Ἐπελεύσει πνεύματος, Ἀπόστολος Εἶχεν ἡ πρώτη σκηνή, Εὐαγγέλιον
Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἅπας γηγενής, Κοινωνικὸν
Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 474)*

=== LEAF p490 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Fifteen Cont. (§§ 46–48) (p. 475)]

475

cried," we chant the Idiomelon "Departing from Your divine command-
ments as from Jerusalem" (twice), the Hymn to the Martyrs (once) and
"Revealing the pre-eternal council"; Glory, Now and ever, "Today is
revealed the mystery before all time." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and
the Readings of the day [Genesis 22:1-18, Proverbs 17:17 - 18:5]. Then
"Let my prayer arise" and, following this, the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified
Gifts.
    In the evening, the Akathist Hymn with the Small Compline is sung,
as is customary. {Kontakion after the Trisagion "Through the descent of
the Holy Spirit". This is not found in this paragraph of the Typikon;
however, it is mentioned in the similar situation regarding the Feast
occurring on the 4th Sunday of Lent. See Paragraph 26. Therefore, it should
be inserted here for ease of use of the Reader.}
47.    On Saturday, after the Midnight Service, the Trisagion, etc., Psalm
50, "Taking knowledge of the secret command," and the Exapsalmos. At
"God is the Lord": the "Taking knowledge of the secret command"
(twice), and the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast, the Psalter of the day. After
the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Triodion "The great general" (twice),
Psalm 50 (read), the Canons of the Akathist "I shall open my mouth" and
of the Pre-feast "The universe joyfully celebrates," with the Verse "Glory
to you, O God." After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion of the Pre-feast (read),
then the Kathisma "Today all creation rejoices" {see March 24th} (At the
6th Ode, as well as at the 7th, 8th and 9th the Triodia of the Martyrs are also
sung); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion "To the Champion General," and
the Ikos "An Archangel was sent" the Minologion and the Postscript of the
Akathist. The Katavasia "I shall open my mouth" and "More honorable"
with its verses. The Exapostilaria "The mystery hidden from all ages" and
that of the Pre-feast "As pre-festal gifts." At the Praises: the Prosomia "A
mystery hidden," Glory, Now and ever, "The language I knew not," Great
Doxology, and the Apolytikion "Today is the prelude of joy."
48.    In the Liturgy, the Typica [Psalms 102 and 145] and the Beatitudes.
With the Beatitudes we sing 4 hymns from the Third Ode and 4 hymns from
the Sixth Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance "Taking
knowledge of the secret command," the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast
"Today is the prelude of joy," of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion
"Through the descent of the Holy Spirit." Epistle "The first part of the
tent" {Hebrews 9:1-7}, and the Gospel "Mary arose" {Luke 2:39-49, 56}.
At "Especially," "Let every mortal born on earth," Communion Hymn "I
will receive the cup of salvation," "We have seen the [true] light" and
Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 475)*
