=== LEAF p1141 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Throne Concluded Part 2 – Parathrone – Timiotera – Tone) (p. 1126 / TD-147)]

TD-147

Church developed, the bishop's throne was erected in its present location on the Soleas on the southern wall of the church. The hierarchical integrity of the SYNTHRONON behind the altar table in the SANCTUARY has not been compromised by the erection of another throne outside of the sanctuary on the soleas; it remains the bishop's seat as well during divine services. Perhaps the most authentic Patriarchal throne in today's Church is that found in the Patriarchal Cathedral of St. George in Constantinople (present day Istanbul, Turkey). On this throne there are 3 inscriptions: 1. Beneath the eaves of the throne gables there is a statement that the Throne was a gift of the Patriarch Jeremiah in 1577 to the then Patriarchal Church of Panagia Pammakaristos. 2. Another inscription at the base of the throne says it was the craftsmanship of the Athenian artist Lavrentios. 3. On one of the gables over its eaves the inscription says it was damaged between 1652-1654 during the tenure of Patriarch Paisios I (1652-1653) and (1654-1655). This throne was renovated under Patriarch Iakovos (1679-1682). The above damage caused the loss of gems and the icons of Christ the Pantokrator or all ruler and the Descent into Hades and burial of Christ which was described by Malaxios in 1577. Its exact location on the throne then is unknown. The current icon is a replacement commissioned by Patriarch Paisios I.

    In addition to the SYNTHRONON and the throne erected on the soleas described above, there is a third kind of throne seen in the Patriarchal Cathedral of St. George. This is the so-called PARATHRONE. It is located between the larger and more ornate throne of the Patriarch and the KLIROS. Since the Patriarchate is also considered to be a monastic establishment, the parathrone is used by the abbot of the monastery or the MEGAS PROTO-SYNGELLOS when he officiates in the absence of the Patriarch.

TIMIOTERA (Τιμιωτέρα, ἡ): The 6 verses of the 9th Biblical Ode or Ode of the Theotokos beginning with “Magnify, O my soul, the Lord” («Μεγαλύνει ἡ ψυχή μου τὸν Κύριον»), each verse followed by the refrain “More honorable than the Cherubim” («Τὴν Τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβείμ...»): The Timiotera is chanted at Matins (Ὄρθρος) after the 8th Ode of the KATAVASIE, which come before the EXAPOSTILARION.

TONE (Ἦχος, ὁ): See MODE.

*(Printed Page TD-147)*

=== LEAF p1142 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Tonsure – Translation of Relics – Translation to Heaven) (p. 1127 / TD-148)]

TD-148

TONSURE: In the Orthodox Church, a tonsure means the cutting off of four locks of hair from the scalp of the one being tonsured; this is done in a cruciform pattern as follows: at the front of the head as the tonsuring celebrant bishop, priest or abbot says “In the Name of the Father” («Εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ Πατρός,»); at the back of the head as the celebrant says “and of the Son” («καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ»); and on either side of the head as he says the words “and of the Holy Spirit” («Καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου Πνεύματος»). The service of tonsure represents an offering of one's self to God and is a part of several of the sacraments.

    Today, there are three types of tonsure: baptismal, monastic, and clerical. In all cases, the hair is allowed to grow back; the tonsure, therefore, is not adopted as a permanent hairstyle. The hair which has been cut is burned in the censer.

    In the rite of Holy Baptism, as a first sacrificial offering to God by the newly baptized, a tonsure is also done when a convert is chrismated.

    Monastic tonsure (of which there are three grades: Rassophore, Stavrophore, and the Great Schema) is the rite of initiation into the monastic state.

    Tonsure is also done prior to the ordination of a layman to the rank of reader. This has led to the commonly used statement that one is “tonsured a reader,” although in sequence the rite of tonsure occurs prior to the actual ordination by the laying on of hands by the celebrant.

*TRANSLATION (ἀνακομιδή, ἡ) of the remains of a saint or a relic: The transference from one place (shrine) to another: e.g., 27 January, Translation of the Remains of St. John Chrysostom. Chrysostom's remains were taken from Kukuso, a desert village in Asia where he had been exiled, to the Church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinople in 438.

*TRANSLATION (μετάστασις, ἡ) to heaven: The ascent to heaven of a sacred personage before his or her death: e.g., 26 September, the Translation to Heaven of John the Evangelist. According to Theofanis

*(Printed Page TD-148)*

=== LEAF p1143 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Translation to Heaven Concluded – Trapeza – Triadika – Triadikon – Trikiria – Triodion – Trisagios Hymn Part 1) (p. 1128 / TD-149)]

TD-149

the hymnographer and Kesarios, the brother of St. Gregory the Great, St. John the Evangelist did not experience natural death but was bodily taken up to heaven—a belief that gained currency in the early Middle Ages. The Church has never accepted this notion as official dogma, yet it celebrates St. John's demise not as a Kimisis (dormition, sleep, repose) but as a metastasis (translation to heaven), perhaps in special honor of the Evangelist as Christ's “beloved disciple” and as a visionary of the apocalyptic realm.

TRAPEZA (Τράπεζα, ἡ): The Greek monastic term used for the dining room where monks gather for meals. See also REFECTORY.

TRIADIKA (Τριαδικά, τά): A series of four hymns composed in honor of the Holy Trinity and found in the Service of the MESONYKTIKON of Sunday in the GREAT OROLOGION. These are sung near the end of this service and prior to the beginning of the service of ORTHROS (MATINS or Morning Prayer). These are sometimes referred to as the Triadic Magnificats (Triadika Megalynaria).

*TRIADIKON (τριαδικόν, τό) Slav. Troichen: A hymn (troparion) composed in honor of the Holy Trinity.

TRIKIRIA (τρικήρια, τά): Three-branched candelabras or candle-sticks.

*TRIODION (Τριῴδιον, τό) Slav. Postnaya Triod: The word has two meanings: (1) The period beginning on the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee and ending on Holy Saturday; or (2) the service book that contains the services of all the MOVABLE FEASTS beginning on the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee and ending on Holy Saturday.

*TRISAGIOS HYMN or TRISAGION (Τρισάγιος Ὕμνος, Τρισάγιον) Slav. Trisvjatoe: ‘Thrice-Holy Hymn’. The hymn sung after the Kontakion in the Divine Liturgy. The word Agios (Holy) is repeated in the hymn three times—hence the name Trisagios Hymn. On The Sunday of Pascha (Easter), Pentecost Sunday, Christmas, and the Epiphany of Our Lord, Osi is Christon is sung in place of the

*(Printed Page TD-149)*

=== LEAF p1144 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Trisagios Hymn Concluded – Trisagion tu Vimatos – Triskelion – Troparion Part 1) (p. 1129 / TD-150)]

TD-150

Trisagios Hymn. On 14 September (Elevation of the Holy Cross) and the Third Sunday in Lent (Adoration of the Holy Cross), Ton Stavron Su is sung instead of the Trisagios Hymn. According to some sources, this hymn dates from the middle of the 4th century. The Trisagios Hymn continues to be sung, in Greek, in certain ceremonies of the Roman Church, such as the Improperia of Good Friday.

*TRISAGION TU VIMATOS (Τρισάγιον τοῦ Βήματος): The thrice-holy hymn as sung when a bishop officiates in the Divine Liturgy. For a detailed outline of this hierarchal format, see Appendix A. of The Byzantine Liturgy: Hymnology and Order by T. Bogdanos. According to the order of service of a hierarchal Divine Liturgy, the elaborate separate phrases of the hymn are sung by the clergy or chanters from the Sanctuary—hence the term tu Vimatos (of the Vima [Sanctuary]). In Greek Orthodox Churches in the United States, these separate phrases of the hymn are often sung by the choir.

TRISKELION (Τρισκέλιον, τό) pl. Triskelia (Τρισκέλια, τά): A three-legged stand for holding books or icons.

TROPARION (Τροπάριον, τό) pl. TROPARIA (Τροπάρια, τά): One of the oldest titles used in the Greek Orthodox Church for a specific piece of hymnography in the form of a free poetic composition, as opposed to a quoted Scriptural text. As a generic title, Troparion can be applied to virtually any composed hymn although today it is used to more specifically indicate the following three types of hymns: (1) Dismissal troparia (APOLYTIKIA, Slav. otpustitel'ny) i. e., troparia of the Resurrection, of the Feast or of the Day — hymns that keynote the main theme of the occasion being celebrated on a given day. These are sung before the dismissal at Vespers and then repeated throughout the services of the day — at Matins, Compline, Hours, and at the Divine Liturgy after the Small Entrance; (2) Troparia Evlogitaria — a series of several hymns, each preceded by the refrain “Blessed art Thou, O Lord,” sung at Resurrectional Matins after the 17th Kathisma of the Psalter and at the Matins of Holy Saturday; and (3) Troparia of a KANON — brief verses that follow the IRMOS in each ODE of the kanon. The verses read at the Matins of Holy

*(Printed Page TD-150)*

=== LEAF p1145 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Troparion Concluded Part 2 – Tropeophoros – Tu Nau – Typika Part 1) (p. 1130 / TD-151)]

TD-151

Saturday with the verses of Psalm 118 [119] are also called troparia. Troparion implies that the composed hymn has been written in a particular style and manner (Gr. tropos—τρόπος). A Troparion is also a succinct summary of a sacred event or saintly person being celebrated in the services. It also serves as a response and refrain to the PSALM verses sung by the chanter. The name Troparion was, therefore, given to short prayers which, in the earliest stage of hymnography, were written in poetic prose and inserted after each verse of a psalm.

    In the fifth century, when the Troparia were composed in strophic form and became longer, these poetical prayers were sung only after the last three to six verses of a psalm. Hymns of this kind were known to have formed part of Matins and Vespers in churches and monasteries of the fifth century. In this period the liturgy consisted of Psalms, of the nine Odes or Canticles, of certain formulae dating back to the earliest times of Christianity, and of the Troparia, added by contemporary hymnodists. This usage, however, did not apply to monastic congregations living in seclusion, such as those of monasteries in the desert. Monks of this strict rule, anchorites and hermits, rejected, as we know from reports which have come down to us, every kind of singing. (AE, and APL)

TROPEOFOROS (Τροπαιοφόρος, ὁ): Trophy bearer

*TU NAU (τοῦ ναοῦ): ‘of the church.’ This is the title for the Apolytikion of the saint or sacred event to which a particular church has been dedicated and after which it is named. The full term in Greek is Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ ναοῦ (Dismissal Hymn of the Church). The Hymn of the Church is usually sung as one of sometimes several apolytikia before the Kontakion in the Divine Liturgy. For the specific Hymns of the churches in the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America, see Appendix B. of The Byzantine Liturgy: Hymnology and Order by T. Bogdanos.

TYPIKA (Τυπικά, τά) Slav. Izobrazitelnaya or Ob'ednitsa: The term may have two possible meanings: First, it can be the plural form of the term TYPIKON; second, it is a service appointed to be served whenever the Divine Liturgy is not celebrated, either because the typikon does not permit the celebration of the Liturgy (as occurs, for example, on weekdays during Great Lent), and during

*(Printed Page TD-151)*

=== LEAF p1146 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Typika Concluded Part 2 – Typikon Part 1) (p. 1131 / TD-152)]

TD-152

the lesser Fasts also, on weekdays for which there is only a simple com-
memoration in the MINEON. The Typika may be served instead of Liturgy
if no Priest is present or the Priest for any reason does not serve the
Liturgy (this may occur for any number of reasons. Married priests, be-
cause of the requirement for abstinence before serving, can not serve the
Liturgy daily although it is rare for any Priest to serve daily. Also, an
emergency beyond his control may have prevented him from preparing
according to the Rule for Holy Communion, or he may have suffered an
injury which would not permit him to enter the Sanctuary, etc.

    The Typika which was at one time chanted before the BEATITUDES
(Μακαρισμοί, οἱ) at the beginning of the Divine Liturgy consists mainly
of Psalm 102 (PB) “Bless, my soul, the Lord” («Εὐλόγει ἡ ψυχή
μου τὸν Κύριον») and Psalm 145 (PME) “Praise, my soul, the Lord”
(«Αἴνει ἡ ψυχή μου τὸν Κύριον»). The service essentially involves
the psalms and prayers of the Liturgy of the Catechumens. Normally, the
Typika is read after the Third and Sixth Hours (in the place where the
Liturgy would normally be celebrated). During Great Lent the Ninth Hour
is inserted before the Typika and the format changes.

    During the reading of the Typika, TROPARIA may be inserted be-
tween the verses of the BEATITUDES, as when the Divine Liturgy is cel-
ebrated. However, during Great Lent this is not done; instead, the Beati-
tudes are chanted by the choir and between each verse they chant “Re-
member us, O Lord, when You come into Your kingdom.” («Μνήσθητι
ἡμῶν, Κύριε, ὅταν ἔλθῃς ἐν τῇ Βασιλείᾳ Σου....»)

    In the Divine Liturgy, the Typika have been replaced in today's
non-monastic churches by the First ANTIPHON “Through the intercessions
of the Theotokos” («Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου») and the Sec-
ond Antiphon “Save us, Son of God” («Σῶσον ἡμᾶς, Υἱὲ Θεοῦ»). The
Beatitudes have been, in turn, replaced by the Third ANTIPHON, that is, the
APOLYTIKION of the SMALL ENTRANCE.

*TYPIKON (Τυπικόν, τό) pl. TYPIKA (Τυπικά, τά) Slav. Ustav.
From Greek typos (τύπος), meaning type, model or form: The
Typikon is the official book regulating and outlining the ritual order

*(Printed Page TD-152)*

=== LEAF p1147 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Typikon Concluded Part 2 – Verse – Vespers – Vestment[s] Part 1) (p. 1132 / TD-153)]

TD-153

(τάξις, ἡ) meaning order or class of every service of the church calen-
dar. The most authoritative Typikon [used in the Greek Orthodox Church]
today has been George Violakis' Typikon tis tu Christu Megalis
Ekklisias (Constantinople, 1888). This work has served as the basis of
most contemporary yearly Typika, such as Diptycha, ed. Apostoliki
Diakonia (Athens); George G. Bekatoros, Taxis ton Ieron Akoluthion
(Athens); and Frank Desby, Liturgical Guide Book, ed. National Fo-
rum of Greek Orthodox Musicians (Columbus, Ohio) as well as others.
The order of the Violakis Typikon has, from time to time, been somewhat
revised by the Patriarchate of Constantinople, usually to correct perceived
errors.

    The term has also been used for the ‘rule’ or set of regulations of
life in a particular monastery (AE).

    For a more throrough background history of the development
and use of the Typikon one should consult the excellent summary
offered by Fr. Alexander Schmemann in his Introduction to Liturgi-
cal Theology, p. 213-220 as well as the brief summary by Fr. Alkiviadis
Calivas in his Great Week and Pascha in the Greek Orthodox Church,
p. 10, Holy Cross Orthodox Press, Brookline, MA 02146.

VERSE (στίχος, ὁ): A line of poetry or of metrical (rhythmical)
prose. In Byzantine hymnology, a STICHOS is usually a prose line
taken from the Psalms and chanted recitative (χῦμα) prior to a HYMN
with a full, rhythmical melody. See for example the esperia STICHIRA
of VESPERS, or the STICHIRA of the Praises (Αἶνοι) in Matins (Orthros).

*VESPERS (Ἑσπερινός, ὁ): The first service of an ecclesiastical
day (and its feast) performed the evening before that day. In the
church calendar, an ecclesiastical day begins at 6 P.M., or sunset of
the previous day, and ends at 6 P.M. or sunset, of the day itself.

VESTMENT(S) (Ἄμφιον, τό, pl. ἄμφια, τά): See also AMFIA.

    First it should be noted that Orthodox clergy wear two types
of robes, liturgical and non-liturgical. Liturgical robes or Vestments
are worn during church services. The non-liturgical garments are the
ordinary daily clothing of the clergy that are worn under their vest-

*(Printed Page TD-153)*

=== LEAF p1148 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued Part 2 – Colors – Reader – Subdeacon and Deacon Part 1) (p. 1133 / TD-154)]

TD-154

ments. As for vestment colors, when the Typikon says anything about
them at all, it only specifies ‘light’ or ‘dark’ vestments, so local tradi-
tion is the only ‘standard’.

    Under the category title of vestments, the following items are ar-
ranged according to the individual who wears them and are discussed in
turn:

LITURGICAL VESTMENTS:

Reader (Ἀναγνώστης, ὁ): The essential role of the READER is to
recite the Readings and Psalms from the Old Testament and the Epistle
lessons from the New Testament during church services. He also
recites some non-sacramental prayers (e.g., the Trisagion) and chants
the psalm verses for certain ANTIPHONS. There is a special service for
the tonsuring of a reader, although in contemporary practice a lay-
man may simply receive the priest's blessing to read on a particular
occasion.

    Readers are permitted to wear a CASSOCK according to the cus-
tom of his particular church, although most do so only while attend-
ing services. Readers do not wear a clerical shirt, as they are not
considered clergy and may not perform any of the duties reserved for
clergy. After being tonsured, the reader is vested in a short FELONION,
which he wears while reading the Epistle for the first time. This
vestment is then removed and never worn again. It is replaced with
a STICHARION, which the reader wears thereafter when he reads the
Epistle. This practice is not universal, however, and many bishops
and priests will allow a reader to perform his function dressed only
in a CASSOCK. Usually, a Bishop will stipulate what vesting practice
he wishes to be followed within his own diocese.

Sub-Deacon and Deacon: Each wears the STICHARION
(Στιχάριον, τό) and the STOLE (Ὠράριον, τό).
The Sticharion, called a dalmatic in western churches, is a long,
straight vestment with wide sleeves, which covers the whole person.
As a form of the garment worn at Baptism, it is made using a heavy

*(Printed Page TD-154)*

=== LEAF p1149 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued Part 3 – Deacon: Sticharion – Orarion – Epimanikia – Cassock – Kalimavkion) (p. 1134 / TD-155)]

TD-155

brocade fabric and is more ornate than that of the reader. It is called “the
robe of salvation and the garment of joy and is symbolic of a pure and
tranquil conscience, a spotless life, and the spiritual joy in the Lord which
flows therefrom, into him who wears it.”

    The STOLE or ORARION is the distinguishing vestment worn by a
Deacon (of any rank: Subdeacon, Deacon, Protodeacon, or Archdea-
con). In some traditions, a Deacon may be given a double orarion as an
award of distinction; in Byzantine Greek practice, however, all grades of
the diaconate (sub-deacons, proto-deacons, arch-deacons) wear the
double orarion. The orarion is a long, narrow ribbon like band of bro-
cade which is usually worn over the left shoulder, wrapped around the
chest to the waist in back and brought back over the left shoulder to the
front. At other times it is crossed upon the breast and back. The Sub-
Deacon wears his Stole always crossed, for convenience in the fulfillment
of his duties. The Deacon, however, binds his Stole about him in the form
of a cross shortly before the Holy Gifts are consecrated, thus typifying the
wings of the Angels who serve about the Altar, as the Deacons them-
selves, as servants and messangers, typify the Cherubim and Seraphim.
Sometimes the Angelic song, “Holy, Holy, Holy,” is embroidered upon his
Stole. The Stole is bound about the Sub-Deacon in the form of a cross at
his ordination, as a symbol that, through the meekness and continence of
his members and the purity of his heart, he is to put upon himself the robe
of purity.

    The Deacon also wears the CUFFS (Ἐπιμανίκια, τά) Slav.
Poruchi, which are tied with laces around the wrist and distal fore-
arm under the sleeves of the sticharion, not over them as does a priest
or bishop. They are worn to remind the deacon that he must not put
his trust in his own strength alone, but in the right hand of the Lord,
the Almighty and merciful God, and in His strength and aid.

    Immediately following his ordination, the Deacon receives a
blessing to wear an outer CASSOCK (EXORASSON) in addition to the In-
ner cassock (ANTIRI) worn by all orders of clergy. In the Greek prac-
tice, he may also wear the traditional black cylindrical or ‘stove-pipe’
head covering called a kalimmafchion (καλυμμαύχιον, τό)

*(Printed Page TD-155)*

=== LEAF p1150 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Concluded Part 4 – Priest: Sticharion – Epitrachelion) (p. 1135 / TD-156)]

TD-156

but without the veil of a bishop or other monastic.

Priest (Ἱερεύς, ὁ): (Note that his vestments are listed in the order in
which they are vested.)

    The STICHARION (Στιχάριον, τό) Slav. stikhar has close sleeves
and is usually of a lighter color and material than that of a Deacon. It is
similar to the western dalmatic.

    When vesting with the Sticharion, the Priest holds it in his left hand
and first blesses the cross on the back saying: “Blessed is our God, al-
ways: now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Εὐλογητὸς
ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν
αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.») He then continues: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord,
have mercy.” («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον.») He then
prays: “My soul rejoices in the Lord. He has clothed me in the garment of
salvation and has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bride-
groom decks himself with a garland and as a bride adorns herself with her
jewels (Isaiah 61:10); now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.”
(«Ἀγαλλιάσεται ἡ ψυχή μου ἐπὶ τῷ Κυρίῳ· ἐνέδυσε γάρ με
ἱμάτιον σωτηρίου, καὶ χιτῶνα εὐφροσύνης περιέβαλέ με· ὡς
νυμφίῳ περιέθηκέ μοι μίτραν, καὶ ὡς νύμφην κατεκόσμησέ με
κόσμῳ (Ἡσαΐας 61·10). Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας
τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The STOLE or EPITRACHILION (Ἐπιτραχήλιον, τό) Slav.
Epitrakhil consists of a long piece of brocade fabric material similar
to but broader than that of the Deacon's Stole. It is worn over the
CASSOCK, passes round the neck and, hanging straight down, it is per-
manently joined in front for its entire length. It signifies the conse-
crating grace of the Priesthood. The Priest, like the Deacon, can
celebrate no office without his Stole. In it, without the FELONION, he
celebrates the less solemn Offices: Small Vespers, ordinary Compline,
Praises or Lauds (Slav. Polunochniza), and the Hours (if the Gospel
is not appointed to be read in them.) In various Prayer-services in
private dwellings, such as those at the birth of a child or the blessing
of homes the Priest will also wear the Stole.

*(Printed Page TD-156)*
