=== LEAF p681 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Meatfare Saturday (Concl. Matins § 8; Liturgy § 9) (p. 666)]

666

δῆς καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια Ὁ καὶ νεκρῶν καὶ ζώντων καὶ τὸ ἕτερον μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ Προσόμοια Δεῦτε πρὸ τέλους πάντες ἀδελφοί, εἰς δ΄, Δόξα, Ὡς ἄνθος μαραίνεται, Καὶ νῦν, Χαῖρε Μαρία θεοτόκε, τὸ Σοὶ Δόξα πρέπει, τὸ Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑωθινὴν καὶ τὰ Νεκρώσιμα τοῦ ἤχου ᾿Απόστιχα (ὅρα ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Τριῳδίου). Δόξα, Ἄλγος τῷ ᾿Αδὰμ ἐχρημάτισεν, Καὶ νῦν, Σὺ εἶ ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν, ᾿Αγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ὁ βάθει σοφίας, καὶ τὸ Σὲ καὶ τεῖχος καὶ λιμένα.

9.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ μετὰ τῶν Τροπαρίων τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Ὁ βάθει σοφίας, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Μετὰ τῶν ἁγίων ἀνάπαυσον, ὁ ᾿Απόστολος Οὐ θέλω ἡμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Βλέπετε μὴ πλανηθῆτε. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω, τὸ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ μετὰ τὸ Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, ψάλλεται τὸ Μετὰ πνευμάτων δικαίων καὶ μνημονεύονται αὖθις τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν κεκοιμημένων, ὡς ἐσημειώθη ἤδη, Πατριαρχῶν, ᾿Αρχιερέων, Ἱερέων, Ἱερομονάχων, Ἱεροδιακόνων, Μοναχῶν καὶ Μοναζουσῶν, καὶ πάντων τῶν ἀπὸ περάτων ἕως περάτων τῆς οἰκουμένης κεκοιμημένων εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων χριστιανῶν, πατέρων, προπατόρων, πάππων, προπάππων, γονέων, ἀδελφῶν καὶ συγγενῶν ἡμῶν Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν καὶ σοὶ τὴν δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν σὺν τῷ ἀνάρχῳ σου πατρὶ καὶ τῷ παναγίῳ καὶ ἀγαθῷ καὶ ζωοποιῷ σου Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων Ἀμήν, καὶ ἡ ᾿Απόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 666)*

=== LEAF p682 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Meatfare Saturday (Concl. Matins § 8; Liturgy § 9) (p. 667)]

667

and ever} the Theotokion “You who have dawned from the Virgin.” Then Psalm 50 and the Canon of the Triodion (read). Then, from the 3rd Ode, the Kathismata of the Triodion. After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion {“With the Saints give rest,”} the Ikos {“You alone are Immortal”}; the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion; the Irmos of the 8th Ode, then the 9th Ode. Then “More honorable” with its verses; the Exapostilaria: “O You who rules the living and the dead,” {Glory, “Grant rest to Your servants,”} Now and ever the Theotokion {“Mary, wedded of God, ceaselessly pray to Christ.”} At the Praises, the following four Prosomia in Mode IV Plagal:
1. “Come, all you brethren, before our end.”
2. “Of what deceit does man boast?”
3. “You who with Your hand created Adam.”
4. “Verily, Christ rose to deliver Adam.”
Glory, “Every man fades like a flower” Now and ever the Theotokion: “Hail, Mary Theotokos” {the Small Doxology} “To You belongs the glory, {our Lord and our God”}; then the Priest “Let us complete our morning {petitions to the Lord”} The Aposticha for the dead in the Mode of the week (found at the end of the Triodion), Glory, “Verily, the taste of the tree brought pain to Adam,” Now and ever, “You are our God.” {Then the Reader:} “It is good to confess to the Lord,” the Trisagion, “In the depths of wisdom” and “You, as rampart and haven.”
9.    At the Liturgy, the Typika and the Makarizmi with the Hymns of the 3rd and 6th Odes of the Triodion Canon. After the {Small} Entrance, the Apolytikion “In the depths of wisdom,” that of the Saint of the Church, Kontakion “With the Saints give rest.” The Apostolos “I do not want you to be ignorant” (1 Thessalonians 4:13-17), the Gospel “See that you are not misguided” (Luke 21: 8-9, 25-27, 33-36). At “Especially,” {the Choir sings} “It is meet,” the Communion Hymn (Kinonikon): Blessed are they whom You have chosen {and taken to You, O Lord. And their memorial is from generation to generation.”} “We have seen the [True] light,” and after “Blessed be the name of the Lord,” we sing the memorial hymns: “With the souls of the righteous,” etc.” The departed are commemorated as noted above:
{Pr.: “Have mercy upon us, O God, according to Your great mercy, we beseech You hear us and have mercy.”}
{Choir: “Lord, have mercy.” (3 times)}
{Pr.: “Again we pray for the blessed memory and eternal rest of the souls of Your departed servants, Kings, Patriarchs, {Priests,

*(Printed Page 667)*

=== LEAF p683 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Meatfare Saturday Rubric; Sunday of Meatfare (Heading, §§ 10–11 Opening) (p. 668)]

668

Σημ.    Ἐὰν συμπέσῃ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν ψυχῶν ἑορτὴ τοῦ Μηνολογίου, ὅρα τὴν τηρητέαν τάξιν ἐκεῖ.

ΚΥΡΙΑΚΗ ΤΗΣ ΑΠΟΚΡΕΩ

10.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου δ΄, Δόξα, Ὅταν τίθωνται θρόνοι, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Οἴμοι μέλαινα ψυχή, Καὶ νῦν, ᾿Ανύμφευτε Παρθένε, ᾿Απολυτίκιον ᾿Αναστάσιμον μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

11.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Τριαδικὸν κανόνα, τὸ Δόξα τῆς Λιτῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν· εἶτα τὰ γ΄ Κατανυκτικὰ τροπάρια καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου μετὰ στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου καὶ τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Βοηθὸς καὶ σκεπαστὴς καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον καὶ τὰ τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα ε΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄, Δόξα, Προκαθάρωμεν ἑαυτοὺς ἀδελφοί, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

*(Printed Page 668)*

=== LEAF p684 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Meatfare Saturday Rubric; Sunday of Meatfare (Heading, §§ 10–11 Opening) (p. 669)]

669

Deacons, Monks, and Nuns, and for our fathers, forefathers, grandparents and ancestors, parents, brothers, and relatives who have departed this life, Christ our God, and to You do we ascribe glory with Your beginningless Father and Your all-Holy, Good and Life-giving Spirit, now and ever and unto the ages of ages. Amen.”
Then: O God of spirits and all flesh...give rest O Lord, to the souls of Your servants who have fallen asleep, Kings, Patriarchs... For You are the Resurrection, the life and the repose of all pious and Orthodox Christians who have fallen asleep, Christ our God, and to You we send up glory with {Your eternal Father, and Your all-Holy and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.} The Dismissal.
Note: If this Saturday of the Souls should coincide with an immovable feast from the Mineon, consult the specific rubrics of that feast.

SUNDAY OF MEATFARE

10.    Saturday evening, at “Lord, I have cried” {we chant} six Resurrection Stichira and four of the Triodion; Glory, “When the thrones are placed,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Stichira of the Resurrection, Glory, “Woe to You, O darkened soul!” Now and ever, “O Virgin without groom,” the Resurrection Apolytikion with its Theotokion and Dismissal.
11.    Sunday at Matins, after the Triadic Canon, the Glory of the Liti of the Triodion {“Knowing the commandments of the Lord”} Now and ever the Theotokion {“Beneath your protection, O Virgin”} and the {Triadic} “It is meet”; then the three Penitential Troparia and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion (twice) and the Theotokion (once), the {appointed Kathisma of the} Psalter and the Amomos (Psalm 118) {“Blessed are they,” the Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. Then we chant both the Canon of the Resurrection and the Canon of the Triodion with the Verse “Glory to You, our God, glory to You,” After the Third Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos followed by the Kathisma of the Triodion and its Theotokion. After the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. Then we sing the Katavasie “A help and a refuge {has salvation become to me,}” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel as prescribed for a Sunday during the Triodion period. Then we chant “More honorable,” {after which comes the

*(Printed Page 669)*

=== LEAF p685 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Sunday of Meatfare (Liturgy § 12; Evening Vespers § 13); Cheesefare Week Rubrics (p. 670)]

670

12.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὅταν ἔλθῃς ὁ Θεὸς ἐπὶ γῆς μετὰ δόξης, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

13.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἐκ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου Στιχηρὰ γ΄ (ἐὰν μὴ ᾖ ἑορταζόμενος ὁ Ἅγιος), καὶ γ΄ τοῦ κατὰ τὴν ἡμέραν Ἁγίου, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Λιχνευσάμενοι τὴν πρώτην ὑπέστημεν γύμνωσιν δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν (Μάρτυρες Κυρίου, πάντα τόπον ἁγιάζετε), Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὰ οὐράνια ὑμνεῖ σε, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ ἤχου Θεοτοκίον (ὅρα ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ), καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Τυρινῆς πρωῒ ψάλλεται ἡ ᾿Ακολουθία τῆς ἡμέρας, ὡς διατάττεται ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ.
Τῇ Τρίτῃ καὶ τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον, ψάλλεται τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε (διότι οὐ γίνεται Λειτουργία τῇ ἑπομένῃ ἡμέρᾳ)· ποιοῦμεν δὲ καὶ μετανοίας, τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις⁴.
Σημ.    Τὴν Τετάρτην καὶ Παρασκευὴν γίνεται κατάλυσις ὁποία καὶ τὰς ἄλλας ἡμέρας τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης, ἤτοι τυροῦ.

4. Ἰστέον ὅτι οὐ παρελάβομεν παρὰ τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων ποιεῖν τῇ Τετάρτῃ καὶ τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς Τυρινῆς Λειτουργίαν τελείαν, οὔτε Προηγιασμένην· ἂν ὅμως τύχωσι μεθέορτα τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς, ἢ μνήμη ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, παραλείπονται τὰ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τελεῖται ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου. ᾿Αποδοθείσης δὲ τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς, εἰς τὰς μνήμας τῶν ἐν τῇ ἑβδομάδι ταύτῃ τυχόντων ἑορταζομένων Ἁγίων Καταβασίαι ψάλλονται ᾿Ανοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν (ὅρα περὶ τούτου καὶ ἐν τῇ Προθεωρίᾳ § 26).

*(Printed Page 670)*

=== LEAF p686 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Sunday of Meatfare (Liturgy § 12; Evening Vespers § 13); Cheesefare Week Rubrics (p. 671)]

671

Ninth Irmos of the Katavasia,} the following Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, and of the Triodion {“As I remember the terrible Day of Judgment,” Glory, “Lo, the Day of the Almighty Lord comes,” Now and ever “As I think of the hour of acount.”} At the Praises: five Resurrection Stichira and three Triodion Stichira. Glory, “O brethren, let us cleanse ourselves {for the queen of virtues,”} Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
12.    At the Liturgy: the Typika and four Makarizmi of the Mode and four verses from the Sixth Ode of the Triodion Canon. After the [Small] Entrance, the following Apolytikia: that of the Resurrection, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “When You come, O God, to earth with glory,” Sunday’s Apostolos {(1 Corinthians 8:8-9:2)} and the Gospel {(Matthew 25: 31-46).} At the “Especially,” {the choir sings} “It is meet,” the Communion Hymn (Kinonikon) “Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [True] Light” and Dismissal.
13.    On this Sunday evening, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing three Stichira from the Oktoichos (unless a major Saint’s feastday is being celebrated) and three Stichira of the Saint of the day {from the Mineon.} Glory, Now and ever the Prosomion Theotokion {from the Mineon.} [The Entrance] “O gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon “Through greed we underwent the first stripping” and Martyrikon of the Triodion {“O martyrs of the Lord, you hallow every place”} Glory, Now and ever, “The Heavenly beings praise You” “Lord, now let Your servant depart,” the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint, the Theotokion of the Mode (see the Orologion) and Dismissal.
On Monday morning of Cheesefare Week the Service of the day is sung as prescribed in the Triodion.
On Tuesday and Thursday evenings, after the Trisagion, we sing “Hail O Virgin, Birth-giver of God” (this because no Liturgy is celebrated on the following day); we make prostrations, then “Lord, have mercy” (40 times), Glory, Now and ever, “More honorable” and the Dismissal.⁴
Note that from the Monday following the Sunday of Meatfare until the Sunday of Cheesefare, the eating of meat is forbidden, but cheese, eggs

4. Note well that the Fathers allowed neither a complete Liturgy nor a Presanctified Liturgy to be celebrated on either Wednesday or Friday of Cheesefare week; if, however, the post-Feast of the Presentation of the Lord or the commemoration of a major Saint (eortazomenu Agiu) occurs, the Triodion hymns are omitted and the Liturgy of Chrysostom is celebrated. If, on the other hand, the Leave-taking of the Feast of the Presentation has already passed, we sing the Katavasie “I shall open my mouth...” and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians...” at the commemorations of major Saints celebrating during this week. (See Paragraph 26 of the Pre-Theory (Protheoria) of this Typikon.)

*(Printed Page 671)*

=== LEAF p687 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Ascetic Fathers Rubric; Sunday of Cheesefare (§§ 14–16 Opening) (p. 672)]

672

ᾠῶν καὶ ἰχθύος.
Τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ πρωῒ ψάλλεται ἡ ᾿Ακολουθία τῶν ἐν ἀσκήσει λαμψάντων Θεοφόρων Πατέρων μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, ὡς διατάττεται ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ.

ΚΥΡΙΑΚΗ ΤΗΣ ΤΥΡΙΝΗΣ

14.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου δ΄, Δόξα, Ἐκάθισεν ᾿Αδάμ, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Ἐξεβλήθη ᾿Αδὰμ τοῦ Παραδείσου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

15.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Τριαδικὸν κανόνα, τὸ Δόξα τῆς Λιτῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν· εἶτα τὰ γ΄ Κατανυκτικὰ τροπάρια καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου μετὰ στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, καὶ τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ὡς ἐν ἠπείρῳ πεζεύσας ὁ Ἰσραὴλ καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον καὶ τὰ δύο τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους ᾿Αναστάσιμα ε΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄, Δόξα, Ἔφθασε καιρός, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

16.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῆς σοφίας ὁδηγέ, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε...

*(Printed Page 672)*

=== LEAF p688 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Ascetic Fathers Rubric; Sunday of Cheesefare (§§ 14–16 Opening) (p. 673)]

673

and fish are allowed even on Wednesday and Friday.
On Friday evening and Saturday morning, the Service of the God-bearing Fathers who shone in the ascetic life is performed together with the Liturgy of Chrysostom, as prescribed in the Triodion.

SUNDAY OF CHEESEFARE

14.    Saturday evening, at “Lord, I have cried” {we chant} six Stichira of the Resurrection and four of the Triodion. Glory, “Verily Adam sat {opposite Paradise bewailing his nakedness and crying,}” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Stichira of the Resurrection, Glory, “Verily, Adam was driven from Paradise,” Now and ever, “My maker and deliverer,” the Resurrection Apolytikion with its Theotokion and Dismissal.
15.    Sunday at Matins, after the Triadic Canon, the Glory of the Liti of the Triodion, Now and ever the Theotokion, the {Triadic} “It is meet,” the three Penitential Troparia and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion (twice) and the Theotokion (once), the {appointed Kathisma of the} Psalter and the Amomos (Psalm 118); the Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. Both the Canon of the Resurrection and the Canon of the Triodion with the Verse “Glory to You, our God, glory to You.” After the Third Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion with its Ikos followed by the Kathismata of the Triodion with their Theotokion. After the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. Then we chant the Katavasie “When Israel walked,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel as prescribed for a Sunday during the Triodion period. Then, “More honorable” {after which we chant the ninth Irmos of the Katavasia}; the following Exapostilaria: the one of the Resurrection and the two of the Triodion. At the Praises: five Stichira of the Resurrection and three of the Triodion, Glory, “The time has come {which is the beginning of spiritual struggles and triumph over Satan},” Now and ever, “Most blessed.” The Great Doxology, “Today salvation.”
16.    At the Liturgy, the Typika and four Makarizmi of the Mode and four verses from the Sixth Ode of the Triodion Canon. After the {Small} Entrance, the following Apolytikia: that of the Resurrection, that of the Saint of the Church; the Kontakion “You the guide to wisdom”; the Sunday Apostolos (Romans 13:11-14:4) and Gospel (Matthew 6:14-21). At

*(Printed Page 673)*

=== LEAF p689 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Sunday of Cheesefare (Concl. Liturgy § 16; Forgiveness Vespers § 17) (p. 674)]

674

Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

17.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Στιχηρὰ Κατανυκτικὰ τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου δ΄ (ὅρα ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Τριῳδίου τὰ τῶν ὀκτὼ ἤχων Κατανυκτικά)· εἶτα τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Μηναίου γ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτοκίον Προσόμοιον, Εἴσοδος (μετὰ θυμιατοῦ διὰ τὸ Μ. Προκείμενον) [αὐτὸ γίνεται εἰς κάθε ἑσπερινὸν Κυριακῆς τῆς Τεσσαρακοστῆς], Φῶς ἱλαρὸν τὸ Προκείμενον Μὴ ἀποστρέψῃς μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ (ὅρα ἐν τῇ Προθεωρίᾳ § 9), τὸ Εἴπωμεν πάντες ἐξ ὅλης τῆς ψυχῆς μέχρι τοῦ Ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν καὶ εὐθὺς Ὅτι ἐλεήμων... Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἔλαμψεν ἡ χάρις σου Κύριε δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν Ὁ ἐνδοξαζόμενος. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τῶν ᾿Αγγέλων αἱ τάξεις σε, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, καὶ τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε, Βαπτιστὰ τοῦ Χριστοῦ, Δόξα, Ἱκετεύσατε ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπὸ τὴν σὴν εὐσπλαγχνίαν⁵ τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Ὁ ὢν εὐλογητός, τὸ Ἐπουράνιε βασιλεῦ, τὰς τρεῖς μεγάλας μετανοίας, καὶ ἡ ᾿Απόλυσις ἄνευ τοῦ Δι᾿ εὐχῶν, μεθ᾿ ἣν ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει τὸ Πάντων προστατεύεις ἀγαθή, τούτου δὲ ψαλλομένου, ὁ κλῆρος καὶ ὁ λαὸς ἀσπάζονται τὴν χεῖρα τοῦ Πατριάρχου (ἢ τοῦ ᾿Αρχιερέως ἢ Ἱερέως) λαμβάνοντες συγχώρησιν, καὶ εἶτα τὸ Δι᾿ εὐχῶν.

Ὁ τύπος οὗτος ὀφείλει τηρεῖσθαι κατὰ πᾶσαν Κυριακὴν ἑσπέρας μέχρι τῆς Ε΄ Κυριακῆς τῶν Νηστειῶν.

5. Τὸ Τροπάριον τοῦτο λέγεται ἄνευ μέλους χῦμα καὶ πραείᾳ τῇ φωνῇ κατὰ τὰ ἀρχαῖα Τυπικὰ ἐπισυνάπτοντα καὶ τὸν λόγον τούτου ὅτι εἰς αὐτὸ δὲν γίνεται μετάνοια· τὰ δὲ προηγούμενα τρία ψάλλονται μετὰ μέλους· ἀλλ᾿ ὁ ἀοίδιμος Πατριάρχης Γρηγόριος ὁ ΣΤ΄ ἤθελεν ἵνα καὶ τοῦτο ψάλληται ὡς καὶ τὰ προηγούμενα· ψάλλονται δὲ καὶ κατὰ πάσας τὰς ἐφεξῆς Κυριακὰς ὡς καὶ τὴν Κυριακὴν τῶν Βαΐων ἑσπέρας, ἀλλὰ τὰς λοιπὰς ἡμέρας τῆς Μ. ἑβδομάδος λέγονται χῦμα καὶ τὰ τέσσαρα.

*(Printed Page 674)*

=== LEAF p690 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Sunday of Cheesefare (Concl. Liturgy § 16; Forgiveness Vespers § 17) (p. 675)]

675

“Especially, {the choir sings} “It is meet,” the Kinonikon “Praise,” then “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
17.    This Sunday evening, at “Lord, I have cried” {we sing} four Penitential Stichira of the Mode (these are found at the end of the Triodion in the Penitential Hymns of all the 8 Modes), then, three Stichira of the order of the Triodion and three of the Mineon. Glory, Now and ever the Theotokion Prosomion {of the Mineon}. At the Entrance (with censer because of the Great Prokimenon; {this is done at all Sunday Vespers of Great Lent}), “O gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon “Turn not away {Your face from Your servant, for I am in trouble; hear me speedily. Attend to my soul, and deliver it}” with its verses (see Paragraph 9 of the Pretheory (Protheoria).) Then “Let us say with all our souls” up to “Let us pray for our Archbishop (name)”. Then immediately, “For You are a merciful God.” At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon “Your grace has shone” (twice) and the Hymn to the Martyrs [Martyrikon] “{O Christ God,} Who are glorified.” Glory, Now and ever, “The ranks of angels praise you.” Then “Lord, now let Your servant depart,” and after the Trisagion the following: “Rejoice O Virgin Theotokos,” “O Baptizer of Christ,” Glory, “Pray for us, {O pure Apostles,}” Now and ever, “{We have taken refuge} under the wing of Your compassion.”⁵ “Lord, have mercy” (40 times). Priest: “{Christ our God} Who is blessed {always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.}” “O heavenly King, {support our believing rulers”}. Then we make three great prostrations {with the Prayer of Saint Ephraim the Syrian}; and the Dismissal without “Through the prayers,” following which the Second Choir sings “O good one, you protect all.” While this is sung, the clergy and the people kiss the hand of the Patriarch (or the Archpriest or Priest) receiving forgiveness; and then “Through the prayers.”
This order must be observed every Sunday evening through the Fifth Sunday of the Fast (Lent).

5. According to ancient Typika, because no prostration is made at this point, this last hymn {“We have taken refuge under the wing of your compassion” is read with a quiet voice. The three preceeding hymns were chanted, but the late, much-praised Patriarch Gregory VI wanted this last hymn chanted also. All these hymns are sung on every subsequent Sunday Vespers including Palm Sunday evening; on the remaining days of Holy Week, however, all four hymns are read.

*(Printed Page 675)*
