=== LEAF p1101 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Oblation – Ode – Oktoichos – Olonyktia – Omoforion Part 1) (p. 1086 / TD-107)]

TD-107

OBLATION (from the Latin oblatum or offering): The act of offering or preparing the gifts of bread and wine during the service of PROSKOMIDI which takes place at the table of PROTHESIS or Oblation..

ODE (ᾠδή, ἡ): See under CANTICLE.

*OKTOICHOS (᾿Οκτώηχος, ἡ) or OCHTOICHOS I MEGALI (᾿Οκτώηχος ἡ Μεγάλη) Slav. Oktoikh, Osmoglasnik: See PARAKLITIKI.

OLONYKTIA (ὁλονυκτία, ἡ): All-night prayer and meditation without sleep. See VIGIL.

OMOFORION (ὠμοφόριον, τό) See also VESTMENTS.

    Sometimes spelled Omophorion Slav. Omofor, omoforij, nadramenia: A form of STOLE worn over the shoulders of a bishop. In the Orthodox tradition, the Omoforion is the distinguishing vestment of a bishop and the symbol of his spiritual and ecclesiastical authority. Originally of wool, today it is a band of brocade decorated with crosses and worn about the neck and shoulders. By symbolizing the lost sheep that is found and carried on the Good Shepherd's shoulders, it signifies the bishop's pastoral role as the icon of Christ.

    Clergy and ecclesiastical institutions subject to a bishop's authority are often said to be "under his Omoforion".

    While all Orthodox bishops wear the Omoforion, a similar vestment in Western Christianity is the archiepiscopal pallium or pall, the use of which is subject to different rubrics and restrictions.

    The Omoforion has two forms: the ancient great Omoforion, which passes around the neck, is folded in the front, and hangs down past the knees in both the front and the back; and the small Omoforion which is much simpler, passing around the neck and hanging down in the front similar to an EPITRACHILION (stole), only wider and shorter, coming down only a little past the waist. Because of the complexity of the great Omoforion, and because of the dignity of the episcopal office, whenever the bishop puts on this Omoforion or takes it off, he is assisted by two subdeacons.

*(Printed Page TD-107)*

=== LEAF p1102 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Omoforion Concluded Part 2) (p. 1087 / TD-108)]

TD-108

    Whenever he presides at any divine service, the bishop will be vested in the Omoforion. If he is serving the Divine Liturgy he will wear both the great and the small Omoforion at different times over his liturgical vestments. At any service other than the Divine Liturgy he will usually wear the small Omoforion.

    During the Divine Liturgy, the rubrics call for the bishop to put on and take off the Omoforion several times. When he is first vested, the subdeacons place the great Omoforion on him, but afterwards, when the rubric calls for him to wear the Omoforion, it is replaced, for the sake of convenience, with the small Omoforion. In some places, when several bishops celebrate together, it is now the custom for the chief celebrant to use the great Omoforion when called for, and the other bishops to wear the small Omoforion throughout.

    Development:
    In the early church, the Omoforion was a broad band of white wool ornamented with crosses and draped loosely over the neck, shoulders, and breast. The modern Roman pallium developed from this early Omoforion; however, in the West it has changed over the centuries into a circular, thin woolen garment for the shoulders, with short, weighted pendants before and behind. Today, the papal pallium adopted by Pope Benedict XVI is closer to the original Omoforion.

    The only change in the Omoforion in the East has been the augmentation of its width, and the material from which it is made. We find distinct testimony to the existence of the Omoforion as a liturgical vestment of the bishop in Isidore of Pelusium about the year 400. It was made of wool and was already seen as symbolic of the duties of bishops as shepherds of their flocks. In the miniatures of an Alexandrian Chronicle of the World, written probably during the fifth century we already find pictorial representation of the Omoforion. In later times we meet the same representation on the renowned ivory tablet of Trier, depicting the solemn translation of relics. Among the pictures dating from the seventh and eighth centuries, in which we find the Omoforion, are the lately discovered frescoes in S. Maria, Antiqua in the Roman Forum. The representation in these frescoes is essentially the same as its present form.

*(Printed Page TD-108)*

=== LEAF p1103 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Omoforion Development Concluded Part 3 – Omologitis – Opisthamvonos Efchi Part 1) (p. 1088 / TD-109)]

TD-109

    The Omoforion probably developed from the civil Omoforion, a shoulder garment or shawl in general use. Probably either the bishops introduced directly by a positive precept as a liturgical pontifical badge a humeral cloth resembling the ordinary Omoforion and called by that name, or the civil Omoforion was at first used by the bishops as a mere ornament without any special significance, but in the course of time gradually developed into a distinctively episcopal ornament, and finally assumed the character of an episcopal badge of office.

OMOLOGITIS (῾Ομολογητής, ὁ): Confessor.

OPISTHAMVONOS EFCHI (᾿Οπισθάμβωνος Εὐχή, ἡ): This is a prayer read by the Priest near the end of the Divine Liturgy. It is so called because the Priest stands "behind the Ambo" and faces the Master Icon of Christ (Δεσποτικῆς εἰκόνος τοῦ Χριστοῦ) immediately to the right of the BEAUTIFUL GATE. The complete text of this prayer in English and Greek is given below:

    "Lord, bless those who praise You and sanctify those who trust in You. Save Your people and bless Your inheritance. Protect the whole body of Your Church. Sanctify those who love the beauty of Your house. Glorify them in return by Your divine power, and do not forsake us who hope in You. Grant peace to Your world, to Your churches, to the clergy, to those in public service, to the armed forces, and to all Your people. For every good and perfect gift is from above, coming from You, the Father of lights. To You we give glory, thanksgiving, and worship, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and forever and to the ages of ages. Amen."

    «῾Ο εὐλογῶν τοὺς εὐλογοῦντάς σε, Κύριε, καὶ ἁγιάζων τοὺς ἐπὶ σοὶ πεποιθότας, σῶσον τὸν λαόν σου, καὶ εὐλόγησον τὴν κληρονομίαν σου. Τὸ πλήρωμα τῆς ᾿Εκκλησίας σου φύλαξον· ἁγίασον τοὺς ἀγαπῶντας τὴν εὐπρέπειαν τοῦ Οἴκου σου. Σὺ αὐτοὺς ἀντιδόξασον τῇ θεϊκῇ σου δυνάμει, καὶ μὴ ἐγκαταλίπῃ

*(Printed Page TD-109)*

=== LEAF p1104 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Opisthamvonos Efchi Concluded Part 2 – Orarion – Order of Service – Orea Pili – Orlets – Orologion to Mega – Orthros Part 1) (p. 1089 / TD-110)]

TD-110

ς ἡμᾶς τοὺς ἐλπίζοντας ἐπὶ σέ. Εἰρήνην τῷ κόσμῳ
σου δώρησαι, ταῖς ᾿Εκκλησίαις σου, τοῖς ῾Ιερεῦσι, τοῖς
Βασιλεῦσιν ἡμῶν, τῷ Στρατῷ καὶ παντὶ τῷ Λαῷ σου,
ὅτι πᾶσα δόσις ἀγαθή, καὶ πᾶν δώρημα τέλειον, ἄνωθέν
ἐστι, καταβαῖνον ἐκ σοῦ τοῦ Πατρὸς τῶν φώτων· καὶ
σοὶ τὴν δόξαν, καὶ εὐχαριστίαν, καὶ προσκύνησιν
ἀναπέμπομεν, τῷ Πατρί, καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ, καὶ τῷ ῾Αγίῳ
Πνεύματι, νῦν, καὶ ἀεί, καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν
αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν.»

ORARION (᾿Ωράριον, τό) Slav. Orar: See VESTMENTS.

*ORDER OF SERVICE (τάξις, ἡ): See TYPIKON.
    The sequence of hymns, prayers, and ritual actions in each service of the church as ordained by the Holy Synod of the Patriarchate of Constantinople and stipulated in the Typikon by George Violakis, published in 1888. Orders of service may be found also in the key service books of the church such as the Mineon, the Triodion, the Pentikostarion, the Paraklitiki, the Efchologion and the Ieratikon. Since its publication, the Typikon has been modified from time to time by the Ecumenical Patriarchate—a continuous practice of the church.

OREA PILI (῾Ωραῖα Πύλη, ἡ): BEAUTIFUL GATE. This is the central or principal gate connecting the NAVE with the SANCTUARY (ALTAR), located in the middle of the Iconostasis

ORLETS: See AETOS.

OROLOGION TO MEGA (῾Ωρολόγιον τὸ Μέγα) Slav. Chasoslov or Tchasoslov: The Great Book of Hours contains mainly the fixed texts for the services of the Daily Cycle, as well as the APOLYTIKIA and KONTAKIA of all the IMMOVABLE and MOVABLE FEASTS of the ecclesiastical year. It is one of the main service books of the Greek Orthodox Church. Alternate spelling: Horologion to Mega. As with the Efchologion to Mega there is also an abbreviated version.

*ORTHROS (Ὄρθρος, ὁ) Slav. Outrenya: See also MATINS. In Greek

*(Printed Page TD-110)*

=== LEAF p1105 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Orthros Concluded Part 2 – Osios, Osia – Osiomartys – Pantokrator – Paraklitiki Part 1) (p. 1090 / TD-111)]

TD-111

the word means the 'early Morning Prayer'. Orthros precedes the Divine Liturgy and is the longest and most complex service of the daily cycle of services. In monasteries, Orthros is normally celebrated in the early morning and is usually followed by the First HOUR. On Great Feasts it is celebrated as part of an All-Night Vigil beginning the evening before, and is combined with Vespers and First Hour. In Greek parishes on Sunday morning, Orthros is normally served just before the beginning of the Divine Liturgy. The service concludes with the Doxology and the DISMISSAL HYMN (APOLYTIKION) of the then occurring feast.

OSIOS, OSIA (Masc. Ὅσιος, ὁ; Fem. ὁσία, ἡ): A Righteous Saint. An epithet indicating that the named saint has led a saintly, monastic life, dying of natural causes. The epithet righteous martyr (ὁσιομάρτυς) usually refers to a martyred monk or nun.

OSIOMARTYS (ὁσιομάρτυς): A Righteous Martyr.

PANTOKRATOR (Παντοκράτορ, ὁ) Slav. Vzederzitel. (Lit. 'He who holds or contains all': The icon of Christ usually seen in the central dome of an Orthodox Church.

*PARAKLITIKI or OKTOICHOS I MEGALI (Παρακλητική ἤ Ὀκτώηχος ἡ Μεγάλη) Slav. Oktoix, Paraklitik: Both titles, given in Greek, are names for the GREAT OKTOICHOS, one of the most important and commonly used liturgical books of the church. It contains the variable (substituted) sections of the services for all the immovable (fixed) dates of the year: 1) SMALL AND GREAT VESPERS, 2) the MESONYKTIKON (Midnight Service) for Sundays only, 3) the ORTHROS, and 4) the DIVINE LITURGY. For the chronological and modal structure as well as the liturgical use of the Paraklitiki, see the Cycle of Modes (under MODE).

    It should be noted that the services which are taken from the PARAKLITIKI for each day may be combined with the services of that same day if it is celebrated also as an Immovable Feast (found in the MINEA) or with the services of that same day if it is celebrated also as a Movable Feast (found in the TRIODION or the PENTIKOSTARION). This

*(Printed Page TD-111)*

=== LEAF p1106 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Paraklitiki Concluded Part 2 – Paramoni – Parartima – Parathrone – Pascha – Paten – Pateritsa – Patriarch – Patriarchiki Pimantoriki Ravdos Part 1) (p. 1091 / TD-112)]

TD-112

entire process of combination is regulated by the TYPIKON and its criteria of ordinance for all the services of the church.

*PARAMONI (παραμονή, ἡ): The 'Eve' of an Orthodox feast begins the day before a major feast. The service of a feast's paramoni (eve) acts as a preamble to the feast itself, its hymns and prayers foretelling and anticipating the impending sacred event.

PARARTIMA (παράρτημα, τό): Appendix or Supplement.

PARATHRONE or PARATHRONO (Παράθρονο, τό): A small throne located between the Patriarchal Throne and the Right Choir outside the ICONOSTASION on the south side of the church. This throne is reserved for the GREAT PROTOSYNGELLOS who officiates in the absence of the Patriarch.

PASCHA (Πάσχα, τό): The Orthodox term for the feast known in the Western Church as EASTER.

PATEN (Δισκάριον, τό) Slav. Diskos: A small shallow dish with a permanent short stem or base which holds the bread prepared at the table of PROTHESIS in the rite of PROSKOMIDI or office of oblation. It stands for the cave in which Christ was born. In its circular shape it also symbolizes the heavens that hold God.

PATERITSA (Πατερίτσα, ἡ): A wooden pastoral staff, walking stick or cane topped by a minimally ornamented knob.

PATRIARCH (Πατριάρχης, ὁ): As used in this TYPIKON, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople.

PATRIARCHIKI PIMANTORIKI RAVDOS (Πατριαρχικὴ ποιμαντορικὴ ῥάβδος): The Patriarchal Pastoral Staff. This staff usually is topped by a decorative motif of two serpents with a cross in the center. The motif is a sign of episcopal authority. The serpents represent the visible and invisible enemies of the Church and the Cross symbolizes the power that Christ has granted to the Church and entrusted to the Bishop in order to vanquish these "serpents" of

*(Printed Page TD-112)*

=== LEAF p1107 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Patriarchiki Pimantoriki Ravdos Concluded Part 2 – Pentikostarion – Phrase – Pimantoriki Ravdos – Placing – Plirotika – Polychronion – Polyeleos Part 1) (p. 1092 / TD-113)]

TD-113

evil. The staff also reminds us of the staff of Moses with which he led the Israelites to the Promised Land.

*PENTIKOSTARION (Πεντηκοστάριον, τό) Slav. Tzvetnaya Triod or Cvetnaja triod', Pentikostaria:

    1. The title of the service book containing the services of all the MOVABLE FEASTS beginning on the Sunday of Pascha (Easter) and ending on the Sunday of All Saints.

    2. The term is also used for the span of time beginning on the Sunday of Pascha (Easter) and ending on the Sunday of All Saints.

PHRASE (φράσις, ἡ): In Greek the word φράσις means a full sentence as well as a fragment.

PIMANTORIKI RAVDOS (ποιμαντορικὴ ῥάβδος, ἡ or πατερίτσα, ἡ) The Pastoral staff of a bishop. See also PATRIARCHIKI PIMANTORIKI RAVDOS.

*PLACING (κατάθεσις, ἡ): Specifically, the placing of a sacred object or relic into a shrine or place of worship: e.g., the Placing of the Robe of the Theotokos at the Church of Vlacherne in Constantinople, an event commemorated on 2 July.

*PLIROTIKA (Πληρωτικά, τά): The series or litany of supplications and petitions following the Cherubic Hymn in the Divine Liturgy beginning with the word Plirosomen (Πληρώσωμεν...) "Let us complete...."

POLYCHRONION (Πολυχρόνιον, τό): Acclamation (of a hierarch or eminent civic leader).

POLYELEOS (Πολυέλεος, ὁ): The title of a hymn that includes Psalms 134-135 which are sung as the third Kathisma of the Psalter on major Feasts. These Psalms are collectively called the Polyeleos because of the many (Greek poly) repetitions of the word 'mercy' (Greek eleos) in Psalm 135. The third section consists of selected psalm verses for each major feast. In Russian use these are usually

*(Printed Page TD-113)*

=== LEAF p1108 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Polyeleos Concluded Part 2 – Post-Feast – Postscript – Potirion – Praise, Praises – Pre-Feast – Priest – Primikirios – Proeortia Part 1) (p. 1093 / TD-114)]

TD-114

reduced to one or two, accompanied by a MEGALYNARION.
    The name Polyeleos is also given to the great chandelier which hangs directly from the central dome of an Orthodox church. It symbolizes Christ, the 'all-merciful'. When this chandelier was furnished with oil lamps, it used 'many oil lamps' (Greek poly-eleos.) On the Holy Mountain of Athos, the monastic state in Greece, the Polyeleos is lighted and swung to spectacular effect in VESPERS at 'Lord, I have cried' and during the Polyeleos at great Vigils. It is also lighted at the Great Entrance on major Feasts, and also at funerals. Around the polyeleos there often hangs a great metal circle, decorated with icons, normally including the twelve Apostles, and surmounted by candles. This is known as a choros. (AE)

POST-FEAST (μεθέορτα, τά): See METHEORTA. Called also AFTERFEAST.

POSTSCRIPT: See YPOMNIMA.

POTIRION: See AGION POTIRION.

PRAISE, PRAISES (αἶνος, ὁ pl. αἶνοι, οἱ): See also ENI. These hymns are to be found near the end of MATINS (ORTHROS) after the EXAPOSTILARION. In the Western churches, the Praises are known as Lauds.

PRE-FEAST (προεόρτια, τά): Called also FOREFEAST. (See PROEORTIA.)

PRIEST (Ἱερεύς, ὁ): That person having the authority to perform and administer the sacraments and other religious rites. In Orthodoxy he is a member of the clergy ranking below a bishop but above a deacon.

PRIMIKIRIOS (Πριμικήριος, ὁ): The Director of Ceremonies or Dean of the Patriarchal Church

*PROEORTIA (Προεόρτια, τά): See also PRE-FEAST or FOREFEAST. The period immediately before a feast—lasting from one to several days—preparing for and foreshadowing the coming of the feast. This

*(Printed Page TD-114)*

=== LEAF p1109 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Proeortia Concluded Part 2 – Proeortion – Proestos – Profitologion – Proimiakos Psalmos – Proistamenos – Prokimenon Part 1) (p. 1094 / TD-115)]

TD-115

festal preparation is expressed in the hymns and prayers of this period.

*PROEORTION (Προεόρτιον) Slav. Predprazdnstvo: See PRE-FEAST OR FOREFEAST. An adjective characterizing a hymn as belonging to the period of a feast's PROEORTIA: e.g., Proeortion Apolytikion (p. 149 in Bogdanos' Byzantine Liturgy: Hymnology and Order; Proeortion Kontakion (ibid. p. 151), etc.

PROESTOS (Προεστώς, ὁ): The head priest of a church or the Superior of a monastery.

PROFITOLOGION (Προφητολόγιον, τό) Slav. Paremijnik: Spelled by some as Prophetologion. This is a liturgical book that contains the Old Testament Lectionary readings assigned to Vespers and to other services during the Church year. Unfortunately, there has not been an edition of this book published in English. Old Testament readings are typically taken from the Mineon or other texts that contain these readings. There have also been texts containing the Lenten Lectionary which have been published in English. One classic text that contains the most commonly used portions of the entire Lectionary is the "Divine Prayers and Services of the Catholic Orthodox Church of Christ" by Fr. Seraphim Nassar. (From Orthodox Wiki)

PROIMIAKOS PSALMOS (Προοιμιακὸς Ψαλμός, ὁ): See INTRODUCTORY PSALM.

PROISTAMENOS (Προϊστάμενος, ὁ): In large churches such as cathedrals there may be numerous clergy; the proistamenos, by date of ordination, is the most senior of the priests and known as the Dean of the cathedral.

PROKIMENON (Προκείμενον, τό) Slav. Prokimen: The Greek word implies something that is "set before" or "introduces something." The Prokimenon was originally an entire Psalm that served to "introduce" the reading of Scripture that followed it. One verse from the Psalm was selected as the refrain to the chanting of all the others. In current liturgical use, the Prokimenon is reduced to the refrain and

*(Printed Page TD-115)*

=== LEAF p1110 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Prokimenon Concluded Part 2 – Prosfora – Proskynisis – Pros Kyrion, Ta – Proskomidi – Prosomion) (p. 1095 / TD-116)]

TD-116

one to four verses of the Psalm being employed. (by APL)

    Another definition for Prokimenon: A verse from the Psalter sung immediately before Scripture Lessons, primarily at Liturgy, Vespers and Matins. [Except for Feasts and during Great Lent, the Scripture Lessons themselves have been discontinued at Vespers.] The Prokimenon sung immediately before the Gospel Lesson is called the Alleluia. (www.stots.edu/article.php'id=15)

PROSFORA (Προσφορά, ἡ): Lit. ‘offering’ or ‘oblation’. Slav. prosvira: A round loaf of leavened eucharistic bread used in the Consecration of the Holy Gifts. On its upper surface it bears a round stamp in the center of which is a square with the sign of the Cross and the Greek letters ΙΣΧΣ ΝΙΚΑ at the 4 corners; ΙΣ is the abbreviation for Jesus Christ, while NIKA is the abbreviation for Victor.

PROSKYNISIS (προσκύνησις, ἡ): A bowing, veneration or worship, sometimes translated as “adoration.”

PROS KYRION, TA (Πρὸς Κύριον, τὰ): Lit. “To the Lord.” This is an abbreviation commonly used in the Typikon for the entire 18th Kathisma of the Septuagint (Old Testament Greek) Psalter. This abbreviation includes a total of 15 Psalms, from Psalm 119-133 inclusive. See also PSALM 119.

*PROSKOMIDI (Προσκομιδή, ἡ) Slav. proskomidija: Often spelled Proskomide. Lit. the offering or bringing of gifts to God. This is the Service of Preparation (OBLATION) performed before the Divine Liturgy. In this service, the priest prepares the bread and the wine for the Holy Eucharist at the table of the PROTHESIS. This table or alcove is situated on the north side of the Sanctuary. The service usually takes place while the ORTHROS (Morning Prayer) is being chanted.

PROSOMION (προσόμοιον, τό); pl. PROSOMIA (προσόμοια, τά) Slav. podoben: A HYMN whose meter and melody are copied from those of an AFTOMELON, a model hymn.

*(Printed Page TD-116)*
