=== LEAF p411 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation VIII Concl. (§§ 14 concl. – 15); Situation IX (§ 16); Situation X (§ 17 incipit) (p. 396)]

396

Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια, Δόξα, Ὥσπερ ἀλάβαστρον
πλῆρες, Καὶ νῦν, Μακαρίζομέν σε, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι λιταί, ἐν αἷς
λέγεται Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὴν Θ΄ Ὥραν
ψάλλονται οἱ Μακαρισμοί, εἶτα τὸ Χορὸς ὁ ἐπουράνιος, τὸ
Πιστεύω εἰς ἕνα θεόν, ἡ Εὐχὴ Ἄνες, ἄφες, τὸ Πάτερ ἡμῶν,
Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου· τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον
μ΄, Ὁ ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβίμ, Ἐν
ὀνόματι Κυρίου, Ὁ Θεὸς οἰκτιρήσαι ἡμᾶς, καὶ ποιοῦμεν τὰς
διατετυπωμένας τρεῖς μεγάλας Μετανοίας, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον,
Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄ καὶ ἡ Εὐχὴ Παναγία Τριὰς καὶ εὐθὺς ἡ
Ἀπόλυσις, καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.

15. Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον,
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ τῶν Ἀποστίχων Ἰδιόμελον
Νηστείαν οὐκ ἀποχὴν βρωμάτων δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, εἶτα τὰ γ΄
τῆς σειρᾶς Προσόμοια Βρώσει πάλαι πικρᾷ καὶ δ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ
Ἁγίου Ὅλος ἐκ νεότητος, Δόξα, Ἔθυσας τῷ Θεῷ, Καὶ νῦν
Σταυροθεοτοκίον, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ ἡ Εὐλόγησις τῶν
ἄρτων· μετὰ τὸ Πλούσιοι ἐπτώχευσαν εὐθὺς ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Νῦν αἱ δυνάμεις καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία
τῶν Προηγιασμένων, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, τὸ Εὐλογήσω
τὸν Κύριον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Ἐν δὲ τῇ τραπέζῃ ξηροφαγία.

Θ΄.

16. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Τρίτῃ πρωῒ
ὁ τῆς Παραμονῆς Ἑσπερινὸς ψάλλεται ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει
Η΄ §13, ἡ δὲ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου, τῶν Ὡρῶν, τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ καὶ
τῆς Λειτουργίας τῶν Προηγιασμένων ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐκεῖ ἐν §
14, 15 διάταξιν. Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, Καὶ νῦν Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον.

Ι΄.

17. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Τετάρτῃ πρωῒ

*(Printed Page 396)*

=== LEAF p412 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Eight Concl. (§§ 14 concl. – 15); Situation Nine (§ 16); Situation Ten (§ 17 incipit) (p. 397)]

397

Theotokion. At the Praises: the 4 Prosomia of the Saint, Glory, "As
alabaster," Now and ever, "We bless you," Great Doxology, the
Apolytikion of the Saint, and the Hours are read plainly, in which are
said the Apolytikion and Kontakion of the Saint. In the Ninth Hour the
Beatitudes are sung, then "The heavenly choir," "I believe in one God," the
Prayer "Forgive, remit and pardon," "Our Father," "For Yours is," and the
Kontakion of the Saint. Then "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), "You who at
all times," "More honorable than the Cherubim," "In the name of the
Lord," "God be merciful to us" and the three great Prostrations, then the
Trisagion, "Lord, have mercy (12 times), and the Prayer "O Most Holy
Trinity," and immediately the Dismissal, then the Liturgy of the Presanctified
Gifts begins.
15. In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the "To the Lord," at
"Lord, I have cried," we sing the Idiomelon of the Aposticha "Let us keep
the Fast not only by refraining from food" (twice) and the Hymn to the
Martyrs, then the 3 Prosomia "Cast out of old from Paradise through the
eating of bitter food," and the 4 Prosomia of the Saint "Entirely from your
youth," Glory, "You offered to the Lord a sacrifice of praise" and the
Stavrotheotokion. Entrance with the Gospel, "O Gladsome Light," and the
Readings of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise," and the Blessing of the
Bread [Artoklasia] followed immediately by "The rich have become poor."
The Apostolos and the Gospel of the Saint, the "Now the powers of heaven"
and the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, Communion Hymn "In
eternal memorial," "I will bless the Lord," and Dismissal. At table, xero-
phagia (strict fast).

SITUATION NINE

16. If the Feast occurs on Wednesday of this week, on Tuesday morning
the Vespers of the Eve is sung as prescribed in Situation 8, Paragraph 13.
The Service of Matins, the Hours, the Vespers and the Liturgy of the
Presanctified Gifts is sung according to the order of Paragraphs 14 and 15.
In Vespers, Now and ever Prosomion Theotokion.

SITUATION TEN

17. If the Feast occurs on Thursday of this week, on Wednesday

*(Printed Page 397)*

=== LEAF p413 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation X Concl. (§ 17 concl.); Situation XI (§§ 18–19); Situation XII (§ 20 incipit) (p. 398)]

398

μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Νηστεύσαντες ἀδελφοὶ σωματικῶς δίς,
καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, γ΄ Προσόμοια τῆς σειρᾶς, καὶ δ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου,
Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Προσόμοιον, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ
Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.
Τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωΐ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου, τῶν Ὡρῶν, τοῦ
Ἑσπερινοῦ καὶ τῆς Λειτουργίας τῶν Προηγιασμένων, ψάλλεται ὡς
διετυπώθη ἐν τῇ Η΄ περιπτώσει, § 14, 15, Καὶ νῦν εἰς τὸ Δοξαστικὸν
τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ Σταυροθεοτοκίον.

ΙΑ΄.

18. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωῒ
εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν ψάλλονται μετὰ τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ
γ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου, κατὰ τὴν ἐν περιπτώσει Η΄ §13 διατυπωθεῖσαν
τάξιν.
Τῇ δὲ Παρασκευῇ τὸ πρωΐ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου μετὰ τῶν
Ὡρῶν ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῇ περιπτώσει Η΄ § 14 διάταξιν. Ὁ δὲ
Ἑσπερινὸς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τῶν Προηγιασμένων ὡς ἐφεξῆς·
19. Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον,
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῆς ἡμέρας Δεῦτε
πιστοὶ ἐπεργασώμεθα δίς, δ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους
καὶ δ΄ τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου· Δόξα, Ἔθυσας τῷ Θεῷ, Καὶ νῦν
τὸ α΄ θεοτοκίον τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου. Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου,
Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω,
καὶ ἡ εὐλόγησις τῶν ἄρτων, εἶτα εὐθὺς ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, Νῦν αἱ δυνάμεις, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς
μνημόσυνον, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκονται οἱ Οἶκοι τῆς Θεοτόκου ὡς
εἴθισται, τὸ Κοντάκιον Πίστει Χριστοῦ ὡσεὶ θώρακα κτλ.

ΙΒ΄.

20. Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωῒ
ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον εἰς
τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δεῦτε πιστοὶ δίς

*(Printed Page 398)*

=== LEAF p414 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Ten Concl. (§ 17 concl.); Situation Eleven (§§ 18–19); Situation Twelve (§ 20 incipit) (p. 399)]

399

morning after the Introductory Psalm and the "To the Lord," at "Lord, I
have cried," we sing the Idiomelon "While fasting with the body" (twice)
and the Hymn to the Martyrs, the 3 Prosomia of the order, and 4 of the Saint,
Glory, Now and ever Prosomion, Entrance "O Gladsome Light" and the
Readings of the Triodion. Then "Let my prayer arise," and the rest of the
Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts follows.
On Thursday morning, the Service of Matins, the Hours, the
Vespers and the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts are sung according to the
order outlined in Situation 8, Paragraphs 14 and 15. At the Doxastikon
[Glory Hymn] of the Vespers for Now and Ever we chant the
Stavrotheotokion.

SITUATION ELEVEN

18. If the Feast occurs on Friday of this week, on Thursday morning in
Vespers, after the 3 Prosomia of the day are sung the 3 Prosomia of the Saint
according to the order of Situation 8, Paragraph 13.
On Friday morning, the Service of Matins with the Hours is sung as
prescribed in Situation 8, Paragraph 14. Vespers with the Liturgy of the
Presanctified Gifts is sung as follows:
19. In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at
"Lord, I have cried," we sing the Idiomelon of the day "Come, you faithful"
(twice) the 4 Prosomia of Saint Charalampos, and 4 of Saint Theodore.
Glory, "You offered to the Lord a sacrifice of praise" and the first
Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance with the Gospel, "O Gladsome Light,"
and the Readings of the Triodion. Then the "Let my prayer arise," and the
Blessing of the Bread [Artoklasia]; then follow the Apostolos and the
Gospel of the Saint, the "Now the powers of heaven," Communion Hymn
"In eternal memorial," "I will bless the Lord," and Dismissal.
In the evening the Iki [Salutations] of the Theotokos as customary,
then the Kontakion "You have carried as a shield of faith," etc.

SITUATION TWELVE

20. If the Feast occurs on Saturday of this week, Friday morning in
Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the "To the Lord," at "Lord, I
have cried," we sing the Idiomelon "Come, you faithful" (twice), the 4

*(Printed Page 399)*

=== LEAF p415 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation XII Concl. (§§ 20 concl. – 22) (p. 400)]

400

δ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους, καὶ δ΄ τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου·
Δόξα, Ὀργάνῳ χρησάμενος ὁ δυσμενής, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄
θεοτοκίον τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου. Εἴσοδος μετὰ Θυμιατοῦ, Φῶς
ἱλαρόν, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας. Νῦν αἱ δυνάμεις,
Κοινωνικὸν Γεύσασθε, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκονται οἱ Οἶκοι τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὡς
εἴθισται, καὶ μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου κτλ., τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
21. Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ψάλλεται
ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
Μεγάλα τὰ τῆς πίστεως καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ
Ἀπολυτίκια τῶν Ἁγίων, μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων. Εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ
ὁ Πολυέλεος, Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου
Χαραλάμπους καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν τὸ ἐκ τοῦ
Τριῳδίῳ Ζέων πίστεως καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· καὶ εἰς τὴν γ΄ τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου
Χαραλάμπους καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, καὶ τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον
τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον, Δίκαιος ὡς φοῖνιξ ἀνθήσει, Πᾶσα πνοὴ
καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους· ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα,
Ταῖς τῶν ἀθλοφόρων [τοῦ ἀθλοφόρου],* Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου·
ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Φάλαγγα θεοστεφῆ.
Κανόνες ὁ α΄ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους· ἀπὸ γ΄
Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ
Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ
Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων· αἱ
Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου εἰς τὴν δ΄ Ὠδὴν Ὁ καθήμενος ἐν
δόξῃ· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ
Ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους καὶ τὰ δύο τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, γ΄
προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Τριῳδίου· Δόξα,
Ὥσπερ ἀλάβαστρον πλῆρες, Καὶ νῦν Μακαρίζομέν σε· Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Μεγάλα τὰ τῆς πίστεως.
22. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια
δ΄ ἐκ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Μηναίου καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου.
Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν· Ἀπόστολος τοῦ
Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 400)*

=== LEAF p416 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Twelve Concl. (§§ 20 concl. – 22) (p. 401)]

401

Prosomia of Saint Charalampos, and 4 of Saint Theodore; Glory, "Using as
his tool the Apostate Emperor," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the
current Mode. Entrance with the censer, "O Gladsome Light" and the
Readings of the day. The "Now the powers of heaven," Communion Hymn
"Taste and see," "I will bless the Lord," and Dismissal.
In the evening the Iki [Salutations] of the Theotokos are performed
as customary, and, after the Trisagion, the Kontakion of the Saint, etc., the
Gospel and Dismissal.
21. On Saturday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of Saint Charalampos
is sung; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Great are the achievements
of faith" and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia of the
Saints and the Theotokion. Then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. Kathismata
of the first Stasis [Stichologia], that of Saint Charalampos and the Theotokion.
At the second Stasis [Stichologia] the Kathisma of the Triodion "Burning
with faith" and the Theotokion; and in the third Stasis [Stichologia] that of
Saint Charalampos and the Theotokion. The Anavathmi, the first Antiphon
of Mode IV, and the Prokimenon "The righteous shall flourish" (Psalm
91:13 LXX, 92:12 RSV). Then "Let all breath" and the Matins Gospel of
Saint Charalampos; then Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "Through the interces-
sions of the fight-bearing ones [one],*" Now and ever, "Through the
intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "Have mercy upon me" and the
Idiomelon of the Saint "God-crowned phalanx." The Canons: the first of
the Triodion and that of Saint Charalampos. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, then the Kathisma of the Saint, of the
Triodion and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of
Saint Charalampos and the Minologion of the Saints. The Katavasie "I shall
open my mouth," and for the Fourth Ode we sing "He who sits in Glory";
then we chant "More honorable." The Exapostilaria: of Saint Charalampos
and two of the Triodion. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of Saint and 3 of the
Triodion; Glory, "As alabaster," Now and ever, "We bless you," Great
Doxology, and the Apolytikion "Great are the achievements of faith."
22. In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes. 4 hymns from the 3rd
Ode of the Canon of the Mineon and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon
of the Triodion. Apolytikia after the Entrance: of the Saints of the day, of
the Saint of the Church, and Kontakion "Protection of all Christians."
Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the day. At "Especially," "It is meet,"
Communion Hymn "In eternal memorial," "We have seen the [true] light,"
and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 401)*

=== LEAF p417 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation XIII: Sunday of Orthodoxy (§§ 23–25) (p. 402)]

402

ΙΓ΄.

23. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ὀρθοδοξίας, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας,
μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου.
Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς
ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ
ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ
Τριῳδίου· τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ τοῦ
Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
24. Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ψάλλεται ὁ
Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν
τοῦ Τριῳδίου Χαίρετε προφῆται τίμιοι καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὴν ἄχραντον εἰκόνα σου καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἶτα
τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν,
καὶ τὰ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· τὰ
Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· Ἀπὸ γ΄
Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα
τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον
καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ
Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου· αἱ Καταβασίαι Θαλάσσης τὸ ἐρυθραῖον
πέλαγος, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις
τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν·
Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου
καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου
γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη.
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
25. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς Κυριακῆς (Ὅρα ἐν τῷ
Ὡρολογίῳ τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ὀρθοδοξίας). Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ
Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς
Κυριακῆς καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, Κοινωνικὸν
Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 402)*

=== LEAF p418 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Thirteen: Sunday of Orthodoxy (§§ 23–25) (p. 403)]

403

SITUATION THIRTEEN

23. If the Feast occurs on the Sunday of Orthodoxy, Saturday at
Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the Reading from the Psalter, at
"Lord, I have cried," we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Triodion and
3 Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever the first
Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Readings
of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint,
Now and ever of the Triodion. Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the
Triodion, of the Saint, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
24. On Sunday, at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Liti
of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Triodion "Rejoice, O
honored prophets" and the Triadic "It is meet;" then the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion "We venerate Your holy icon" and the Exapsalmos. At "God
is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the
Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and the third Stasis
[Stichologia] of the Saint with the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi,
the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the Triodion,
that of the Saint, and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and
Ikos of the Triodion and the Minologion of the Saint and the Postscript of
the Triodion. The Katavasie "The open expanse of the Red Sea," and the
entire order of the Matins Gospel as on a Sunday of the Triodion; then "More
honorable." The Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, of the
Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 2 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the
Triodion and 3 of the Saint; Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Most
blessed are you," Great Doxology, and "Today salvation."
25. In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Sunday (See the Orologion,
Sunday of Orthodoxy). Apolytikia after the Entrance: of the Resurrection,
of the Triodion, of the Saint, of the Saint of the Church, and Kontakion "To
the champion general." Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday and then the
Liturgy of Saint Basil. Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We have
seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 403)*

=== LEAF p419 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation XIV: Second Week of Great Lent (§§ 26–28); Concurrence Envelope Note; February 24 Heading (p. 404)]

404

ΙΔ΄.

26. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Β΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας,
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ Κατανυκτικὰ τοῦ ἤχου οὐ ψάλλονται, ἀλλὰ
τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου Δίδου μοι κατάνυξιν, καὶ
τὰ ἕτερα β΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους Ὅλος ἐκ νεότητος, Δόξα,
Ἔθυσας τῷ Θεῷ, Καὶ νῦν Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν,
τὸ Μέγα Προκείμενον Ἔδωκας κληρονομίαν, μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ
ἐκ τρίτου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα ψάλλεται τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δεῦτε
ἐκκαθάρωμεν ἀργῶς, δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, Δόξα, Τὸν νοερὸν
ἀδάμαντα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἐκ παντοίων κινδύνων, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
Τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε οὐ ψάλλεται, διὰ τὸ τελεῖσθαι αὔριον
Λειτουργίαν Προηγιασμένην.
27. Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ πρωΐ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τοῦ Ἁγίου ἀπὸ
τῆς Λιτῆς μέχρι τῆς Δοξολογίας, ὡς καὶ τῶν Ὡρῶν, ψάλλεται ὡς
διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Η΄ § 14. Ἐν δὲ τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν
τὸ τῶν Ἀποστίχων Ἰδιόμελον Τὴν σωματικὴν νηστείαν δίς, καὶ τὸ
Μαρτυρικόν, τῆς σειρᾶς Προσόμοια γ΄ Τίνι ὡμοιώθης ταλαίπωρε,
καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄ Ἔδωκας τὸ σῶμά σου, Δόξα, Φάλαγγα
θεοστεφῆ, Καὶ νῦν Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ
Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ ἡ τῶν ἄρτων εὐλόγησις· μετὰ τὸ Πλούσιοι
ἐπτώχευσαν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ
καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς
μνημόσυνον, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
28. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τρίτῃ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, ἅπασαν τὴν τῆς
Ἀκολουθίας διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν περιπτώσει Η΄ §13, 14, 15. Ἐννοεῖται
ὅμως ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ Τριῳδίου λέγονται τὰ τῆς ἡμέρας.
Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους δύναται νὰ
συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ, ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ
Φαρισαίου, μέχρι τῆς Τρίτης τῆς Β΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν, ὡς
ὁρᾶται ἐν τῷ τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακι.

Τῇ ΚΔ΄. Ἡ α΄ καὶ β΄ εὕρεσις τῆς τιμίας κεφαλῆς τοῦ
Προδρόμου.

*(Printed Page 404)*

=== LEAF p420 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Fourteen: Second Week of Great Lent (§§ 26–28); Concurrence Envelope Note; February 24 Heading (p. 405)]

405

SITUATION FOURTEEN

26. If the Feast occurs on Monday of the Second Week, Sunday at
Vespers, at "Lord, I have cried," the Penitential {Kataniktika} Hymns of the
Mode are not sung, but we sing the 3 Prosomia of Triodion "Grant me
contrition," and the two others and 3 Prosomia of Saint Charalampos
"Entirely from my youth," Glory, "You sacrificed to God," Now and ever
Prosomion Theotokion. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Great
Prokimenon "You gave inheritance," 3 times with its verses. At the
Aposticha: the Idiomelon "Come let us cleanse ourselves" is sung twice
slowly, and the Martyrikon. Glory, "Let us praise in spirit that living steel
of endurance," Now and ever, "From all dangers"; then "Now let me
depart" and the Trisagion. The Apolytikion of the Saint, the Theotokion,
and Dismissal.
The "O Theotokos Virgin" is not sung, since the Presanctified
Liturgy will be celebrated tomorrow.
27. On Monday morning, the Service of Matins of the Saint from the
Liti until the Doxology, as well as the Hours, are sung as prescribed
in Situation 8, Paragraph 14. In the Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and
the "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried," we sing the Idiomelon of the
Aposticha "Let us keep a spiritual fast" twice, and the Martyrikon, the three
Prosomia of the order "To what shall you be likened," and 4 of the Saint
"You gave your body," Glory, "God-crowned phalanx" Now and ever
Prosomion Theotokion. Entrance with the Gospel, "O Gladsome light," the
Readings of the Triodion. Then "Let my prayer arise" and the Blessing of
the Bread with "The rich were made poor." The Apostolos and the Gospel
of the Saint and then the Liturgy of the Presanctified. Communion Hymn
"In eternal memorial," "I will bless the Lord," and Dismissal.
28. If the Feast occurs on Tuesday of this week, for the entire order of
the Service see Situation 8, Paragraphs 13, 14, 15. It is understood, however,
that the hymns from the Triodion are those of the day.
Note that the Commemoration of Saint Charalampos may occur
within the Triodion period from the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee
to the Tuesday of the Second Week of Lent, as can be seen in the Festal
Chart.

The 24th. First and Second Discoveries of the Honorable Head of
John the Forerunner.

*(Printed Page 405)*
