=== LEAF p301 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situations Three & Four: Apodosis of Situation Three; Situation Four: Nativity on Monday (p. 286)]

286

Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Στέργειν μὲν ἡμᾶς. Κοινωνικὸν Λύτρωσιν ἀπέστειλε, Ἡ Γέννησίς σου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Τρίτῃ πρωῒ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ ἁγίου Στεφάνου μετὰ τῆς τοῦ Ὁσίου Θεοδώρου καὶ τῶν μεθεόρτων, ὡς διατάττεται ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ (ὅρα καὶ περίπτωσιν Α΄, Σημείωσιν τῆς § 14).

Ἡ ἀπόδοσις.

30.    Τῆς ἑορτῆς ἡ Ἀπόδοσις κατὰ τὴν Γ΄ ταύτην περίπτωσιν γίνεται τὸ προσεχὲς Σάββατον (ἤτοι τῇ Λ΄ τοῦ μηνός, [ὀρθότερον εἶναι τῇ ΛΑ΄ τοῦ μηνός]), ἐν ᾧ ὡς προείρηται ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 15 ψάλλονται ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τοῦ Σαββάτου πρὸ τῶν Φώτων.

Δ΄.

31.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Δευτέρᾳ, τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωῒ μετὰ τὴν ἐνδιάτακτον Ἀκολουθίαν τοῦ Ὄρθρου, ψάλλονται αἱ Μ. Ὧραι μόναι ὡς προδιετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 1-5 καὶ μετὰ τὴν εὐχὴν τῆς Θ΄ Ὥρας ἡ Ἀπόλυσις. Καὶ ἐν τῇ περιπτώσει ταύτῃ Ἀπολυτίκιον εἰς τὰς Ὥρας λέγεται τὸ Ἑτοιμάζου Βηθλεὲμ διὰ τὸ μὴ ἄμεσον εἶναι (ὡς εἴρηται ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 22) τὴν Παραμονὴν τῇ ἑορτῇ.
32.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ πρωῒ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Δέκα Μαρτύρων καὶ τῶν Προεορτίων ψάλλονται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν· τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἑτοιμάζου Βηθλεὲμ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον τὸν προαιώνιον Λόγον. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Σαββάτου πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως. Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
33.    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Κυριακῇ πρωῒ, ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως Κυριακῆς, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 7,8,9.
34.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς Μέγας Ἑσπερινὸς ὡς προδιετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 25.
35.    Τῇ δὲ Δευτέρᾳ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 7,8, μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου.

*(Printed Page 286)*

=== LEAF p302 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situations Three & Four: Apodosis of Situation Three; Situation Four: Nativity on Monday (p. 287)]

287

Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and Dismissal.
    In the evening and on Tuesday morning the Service of Saint Stephen is sung with that of the Righteous Theodore and those hymns of the Post-feast, as prescribed in the Mineon (see also the Note of Paragraph 14 in Situation One).

The Leave-taking.

30.    The Leave-taking of the Feast in this Third Situation occurs the following Saturday (that is the 30th of the month) [it should be the 31st] in which (as indicated in Situation One, Paragraph 15) are sung all those hymns of the Feast. Apostolos and Gospel are those of the Saturday before Epiphany.

SITUATION FOUR

31.    If the Feast of Christ’s Nativity occurs on a Monday, on Friday morning, after the prescribed Matins Service, the Great Hours alone are sung, as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 1 - 5; after the Prayer of the 9th Hour, follows the usual Dismissal. In this Situation in the Hours, we use as Apolytikion the hymn “Prepare, Bethlehem,” since (as mentioned above in Situation Three, Paragraph 22) it is not the immediate Eve of the Feast.
32.    That Friday evening and Saturday morning, the Service of the 10 Martyrs and of the Pre-feast are sung according to the order in the Mineon. The Apolytikion “Prepare, Bethlehem” and the Kontakion “Today the Virgin the pre-eternal Word.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Saturday before Christ’s Birth, Communion Hymn “Blessed are they who you have chosen,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
33.    On Saturday evening and Sunday morning, the Service of the Sunday Before Christmas, as prescribed in Situation Three, paragraphs 7, 8, 9.
34.    On that Sunday evening is sung the Great Vespers of the Feast, as prescribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 25.
35.    On Monday, the Service of Matins is sung, as it is presented in Situation One, Paragraphs 7, 8, together with the Liturgy of Saint Basil.

*(Printed Page 287)*

=== LEAF p303 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situation Four Continued: Synaxis of the Theotokos; Sunday after Nativity & Apodosis (p. 288)]

288

Ἡ Σύναξις τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου.

36.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Δευτέρᾳ ἑσπέρας, καὶ τῇ Τρίτῃ πρωῒ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ, τοῦ Ὄρθρου καὶ τῆς Λειτουργίας ψάλλεται ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 9,10, Ἀπόστολος Ἀδελφοὶ ὁ ἁγιάζων καὶ οἱ ἁγιαζόμενοι καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναχωρησάντων τῶν Μάγων (Ὅρα § 11 Σημ. ε΄).

Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν καὶ ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς Ἑορτῆς.

37.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Θεοπατόρων γ΄, Δόξα Μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν, Καὶ νῦν Αὐγούστου μοναρχήσαντος, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα Ἱερέων μνήμη. Καὶ νῦν Σπηλαίῳ παρῴκησας, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Θεοπατόρων Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσὴφ, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
38.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ Γέννησίς σου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Μνήστορος Χριστοῦ θεράπων μακάριε μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Πατρὸς ὡς ἀληθῶς, Καὶ νῦν Χορὸς τῶν Προφητῶν ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν, αἱ Καταβασίαι διπλαῖ καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ καὶ τῶν δύο Κανόνων τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ ἀμφότεραι αἱ Καταβασίαι τῆς Θ΄. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Θεοπατόρων καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄. Δόξα Αἷμα καὶ πῦρ. Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον

*(Printed Page 288)*

=== LEAF p304 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situation Four Continued: Synaxis of the Theotokos; Sunday after Nativity & Apodosis (p. 289)]

289

The Synaxis of the Most Holy Theotokos.

36.    On Monday evening and Tuesday morning, the Service of Vespers, Matins and Liturgy are sung as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 9, 10. The Apostolos “Brethren, both He that sanctifies and they who are sanctified,” and the Gospel “And when the wise men departed.” (See Paragraph 11, Note 5).

Sunday After the Birth of Christ and the Leave-taking of the Feast.

37.    On Saturday evening, after the Introductory Psalm at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 3 Resurrection Stichira, 4 Idiomela of the Feast “Come, let us greatly rejoice in the Lord,” and 3 of the Fathers, Glory, “Let us commemorate,” Now and ever, “When Augustus reigned alone.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, “Your Nativity has become the priests’ memorial,” Now and ever, “You have come to dwell in a cave.” Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers “Proclaim, O Joseph,” and of the Feast, and Dismissal.
38.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic “It is meet,”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and those of the Feast instead of the Theotokia, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast with the Verse “Glory to you, O God” and of the Betrothed “Blessed servant of Christ” with the Verse “Holy one of God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos (read), then the Kathisma “As a true Father,” Glory, Now and ever, “The chorus of Prophets.” After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Sunday after the Nativity of Christ, the Minologion of the Saints of the day and the Postscript of the Sunday after Christmas. The double Katavasie and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then the 9th Ode of both Canons of the Feast with their Megalynaria and both Katavasie of the 9th Ode. Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Feast, Glory, “The fire and blood,” Now and ever, “Most blessed are You,” Great Doxology and

*(Printed Page 289)*

=== LEAF p305 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situation Four Concluded; Situation Five: Nativity on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday (p. 290)]

290

σωτηρία.
39.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἰς τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ ἐκ Παρθένου τεχθείς, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, Ἡ Γέννησίς σου, τὸ Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσὴφ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῶν Φώτων. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Μεγάλυνον ἡ ψυχή μου . . . Στέργειν μὲν ἡμᾶς, Κοινωνικὸν Λύτρωσιν ἀπέστειλε, Ἡ Γέννησίς σου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ε΄.

40.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Τρίτῃ, Τετάρτῃ ἢ Πέμπτῃ, τῇ Παραμονῇ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Μ. Ὡρῶν, ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, καὶ τὸ πρωῒ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὡς καὶ ἡ τῆς ἑπομένης ἡμέρας, ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 1-11. Καὶ ἐν ταῖς τρισὶ ταύταις περιστάσεσιν ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν ψάλλεται ὡς ἐφεξῆς.

Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν.

41.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα γ΄, καὶ τῶν Θεοπατόρων γ΄, Δόξα Μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα Ἱερέων μνήμη. Καὶ νῦν Χορεύουσιν Ἄγγελοι, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Θεοπατόρων Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσὴφ, Ἡ Γέννησίς σου Χριστέ, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
42.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ψάλλεται ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ Γέννησίς σου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Μνήστορος μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου...

*(Printed Page 290)*

=== LEAF p306 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situation Four Concluded; Situation Five: Nativity on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday (p. 291)]

291

“Today salvation.”
39.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, at the 2nd Antiphon “born of a Virgin.” The Entrance Hymn of the Feast with “who is risen from the dead.” The Resurrection Apolytikion, then “Your birth, O Christ,” then “Proclaim, O Joseph,” the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “The Virgin today.” The Trisagios Hymn, the Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before Epiphany. At “Especially,” “Magnify, O my soul, . . . It would be easier for us.” Communion Hymn “The Lord has sent deliverance,” the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and Dismissal.

SITUATION FIVE

40.    If the Feast of the Nativity of Christ occurs on a Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday: on the Eve, the Service of the Hours, Great Vespers and the Liturgy of Basil the Great are performed; and in the morning, the Service of the Feast, as well as of the following day are sung as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 1 - 11. And in all three of these occasions, the Service of the Sunday after the Birth of Christ is sung as follows:

Sunday After the Nativity of Christ.

41.    On Saturday evening after the Introductory Psalm at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Idiomela of the Feast “Come, let us greatly rejoice in the Lord,” and 3 of the Fathers, Glory, “Let us commemorate,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, “Your Nativity has become the priest’s memorial,” Now and ever, “Today all the angels dance.” Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers “Proclaim, O Joseph,” “Your birth, O Christ,” and Dismissal.
42.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50 is sung the Triadic Canon and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and those of the Post-feast instead of the Theotokia, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Betrothed with the Verse “Holy one of God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos, then the Kathisma “As

*(Printed Page 291)*

=== LEAF p307 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situation Five Concluded; Month of January: January 1, Circumcision of Christ & St. Basil the Great (p. 292)]

292

εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Πατρὸς ὡς ἀληθῶς, Καὶ νῦν Χορὸς τῶν Προφητῶν· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον Εὐφροσύνης σήμερον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος Ἀπορρήτῳ βουλῇ, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἔσωσε λαὸν καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Θεοπατόρων καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Εὐφραίνεσθε δίκαιοι δ΄, Δόξα Αἷμα καὶ πῦρ, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
43.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Μνήστορος δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Ἡ Γέννησίς σου, τὸ Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσὴφ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τέλος τῶν πέντε Περιπτώσεων τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Χριστουγέννων

ΜΗΝ ΙΑΝΟΥΑΡΙΟΣ

Τῇ Α΄.    Ἡ Περιτομὴ τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ μνήμη τοῦ ἐν ἁγίοις πατρὸς ἡμῶν Βασιλείου τοῦ μεγάλου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ δύο Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς διπλασιάζοντες τὸ πρῶτον, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Προσόμοια γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Σοφίας ἐραστής, Καὶ νῦν, Συγκαταβαίνων ὁ Σωτήρ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα, Ὁ τὴν χάριν τῶν θαυμάτων, Καὶ νῦν, Οὐκ ἐπῃσχύνθη ὁ πανάγαθος Θεός. Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις Ὁ ἐν τῇ ὀγδόῃ ἡμέρᾳ σαρκὶ περιτμηθῆναι καταδεξάμενος διὰ τὴν ἡμῶν σωτηρίαν Χριστὸς ὁ ἀληθινός . . . .
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα...

*(Printed Page 292)*

=== LEAF p308 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situation Five Concluded; Month of January: January 1, Circumcision of Christ & St. Basil the Great (p. 293)]

293

a true Father,” Glory, Now and ever, “The chorus of Prophets”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion “Of joy today” and the Ikos “Of ineffable will,” the Minologion of the Saints of the day and the Postscript of the Sunday after Christmas. The Katavasie “He saved the people,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Feast, “Make glad, O you righteous,” Glory, “The fire and blood,” Now and ever, “Most blessed are You,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
43.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Betrothed. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, the “Your birth, O Christ,” the “Proclaim, O Joseph,” that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “The Virgin today.” The Apostolos and the Gospel of the Sunday after Christ’s Nativity. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

End of the five Situations of the Feast of Christmas.

MONTH OF JANUARY

The 1st    The Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ and commemoration of our Father Among the Saints Basil the Great.

1.    In Vespers following the Introductory Psalm and the first Stasis of the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the 2 Idiomela of the Feast repeating the first, and 3 Prosomia of the Saint. Glory of the Saint “O lover of Wisdom,” Now and ever, “The Savior coming down.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela of the Saint, Glory, “Having received the grace of miracles,” Now and ever, “The all-good God was not ashamed.” The Apolytikia: of the Saint, then Glory, Now and ever of the Feast once, and Dismissal “May He who on the eighth day deigned to be circumcised in the flesh for our salvation, Christ our true God ....”
2.    In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “The human form without change” and the Exapsalmos.

*(Printed Page 293)*

=== LEAF p309 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 1 Continued: Matins and Festal Megalynaria of Ode 9 (p. 294)]

294

τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Μορφὴν ἀναλλοιώτως καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, δὶς καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν ἐξῆλθεν ὁ φθόγγος αὐτοῦ [τὸ Μηναῖον καὶ ἄλλαι πηγαὶ ὑποδεικνύουν ὡς τὸ ὀρθὸν Προκείμενον τὸ Τὸ στόμα μου λαλήσει σοφίαν]· τὸ Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου (ζήτει, Νοεμβρίου ΙΓ΄)· εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ Ἱεράρχου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἐξεχύθη ἡ χάρις ἐν χείλεσί σου· ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς Δεῦτε λαοὶ μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου Σοῦ τὴν φωνὴν μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ καταβασίαι διπλαῖ, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ Μεγαλυνάρια αὐτῶν.

Διὰ τὸν Α΄ Κανόνα.

Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τῶν ἄνω στρατευμάτων. [Δίς·]
Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν κατὰ τὸν νόμον, σαρκὶ περιτμηθέντα.
Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ἐν τῇ ὀγδόῃ, περιτομὴν λαβόντα.
[Σήμερον ὁ Δεσπότης, τέμνεται τὴν σάρκα, ὡς βρέφος πληρῶν τὸν Νόμον.]*
Σήμερον ὁ Δεσπότης, σαρκὶ περιετμήθη, καὶ Ἰησοῦς ἐκλήθη.

Διὰ τὸν Β΄ Κανόνα.

Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ἐν Ἱεράρχαις, Βασίλειον τὸν μέγαν.
Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ἐκ Καισαρείας, Βασίλειον τὸν μέγαν.
[Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν τῆς οἰκουμένης, ὑπέρλαμπτρον φωστῆρα.]*
[Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν κεκοσμηκότα, Χριστοῦ τὴν Ἐκκλησίαν.]*

*(Printed Page 294)*

=== LEAF p310 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 1 Continued: Matins and Festal Megalynaria of Ode 9 (p. 295)]

295

At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion of the Saint (2 times) and of the Feast (once), then the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode Four and the Prokimenon “His word went out to all the earth” {it appears, however, from the Mineon and other sources that the correct Prokimenon is “My mouth shall speak wisdom”}. Then “Let everything that has breath” and the Gospel of Matins (see November 13); then Psalm 50 read, Glory, “By the intercessions of the Hierarch,” Now and ever, “By the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “Have mercy upon me, O God,” and the Idiomelon “Grace poured forth from your lips”; the Canon of the Feast “Come, all you people” with the Verse “Glory to You, O God” and of the Saint “It would be fitting for the sound of your voice” with the Verse “Holy One of God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Kathismata of the Saint and of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the Minologion. Both (double) Katavasie, then the 9th Ode of the Feast with that of the Saint and their Megalynaria.

For Canon One

Magnify, O my soul, her who is greater in honor than the hosts on high. [Twice]
Magnify, O my soul, Him who is circumcised in the flesh according to the law.
Magnify, O my soul, Him Who received circumcision on the eighth day.
[Today the Master is circumcised in the flesh fulfilling the law as an infant.]*
Today the Lord is circumcised in the flesh and his Name is called Jesus.

For Canon Two

Magnify, O my soul, Basil, great among holy bishops.

Magnify, O my soul, Basil the Great from Caesarea.

[Magnify, O my soul, the most bright luminary of the universe.]*

[Magnify, O my soul, the adorner of the Church of Christ.]*

*(Printed Page 295)*
