=== LEAF p641 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Forefeast of the Transfiguration (August 5, Concl. §§ 4–6); The Holy Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ (August 6, Heading, § 1 Opening) (p. 626)]

626

τῷ Ὄρει τῷ Θαβὼρ (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ προεόρτιον καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
      Ἡ δὲ τοῦ μάρτυρος Εὐσιγνίου ᾿Ακολουθία ἐν τοῖς ᾿Αποδείπνοις.

5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
προεόρτιον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ προεόρτιον ἅπαξ, εἶτα
τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ
σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ προεόρτιος, οὗ ὁ
Στίχος Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα
προεόρτιον Ἐπεφάνη, ἤγγικεν ἅπαξ· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ
Καταβασίαι Χοροὶ Ἰσραήλ, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, ἡ Καταβασία
Ὁ τόκος σου ἄφθορος, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, καὶ
τὸ προεόρτιον ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ
προεόρτια Τῆς παναγίας ἐνδόξου Μεταμορφώσεως εἰς δ΄,
Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ προεορτίου Κανόνος δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ προεόρτιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἐν τῇ θείᾳ σήμερον Μεταμορφώσει,
᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

Τῇ ΣΤ΄. Ἡ Μεταμόρφωσις τοῦ Κυρίου καὶ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν
Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Μεταμορφώσεως ἐν Κυριακῇ, οὐδὲν τῶν
᾿Αναστασίμων ψάλλομεν, ἀλλ᾿ ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς ἑξῆς· Τῷ
Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Πρὸ τοῦ Σταυροῦ σου Κύριε εἰς ς΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Προτυπῶν τὴν Ἀνάστασιν τὴν σήν, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ
Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ ᾿Αναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα,
τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Πέτρῳ καὶ Ἰωάννῃ καὶ Ἰακώβῳ
, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Μετεμορφώθης ἐν τῷ Ὄρει ἐκ γ΄ καὶ

*(Printed Page 626)*

=== LEAF p642 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Forefeast of the Transfiguration (August 5, Concl. §§ 4–6); The Holy Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ (August 6, Heading, § 1 Opening) (p. 627)]

627

Resurrection, of the Pre-feast, and Dismissal.
      The Service of the Martyr Efsignios is chanted at Compline.

5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast and
the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion twice
and that of the Pre-feast once, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The
Resurrection Kathismata in order; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi
of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of
the Pre-feast with the Verse “Glory to You, our God, glory to You.” After
the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Pre-feast “He appeared, He came near”
(once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and
the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie “Choirs of Israel,”
and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honor-
able.” The Katavasia “Your birth-giving was shown to be undefiled.”
Exapostilaria of the Resurrection, and of the Pre-feast (once). At the
Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Pre-feast “Of the all-holy and
glorious Transfiguration” (in 4), Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever,
“Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
6.    In the Liturgy are sung the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and
4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance,
the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Pre-feast, that of the Saint of the
Church, and the Kontakion “Today, in the Divine Transfiguration,”
Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,”
Communion Hymn “Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light”
and Dismissal.

The 6th        The Transfiguration of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

1.    If the Feast of the Transfiguration occurs on a Sunday, none of the
Resurrection Hymns are sung but only those of the Feast, as follows: In
Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm at “Lord, I
have cried” we sing the Idiomela “Before Your Crucifixion, Lord” (in 6).
Glory, Now and ever, “Prefiguring Your Resurrection.” Entrance, “O
Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the
Aposticha: the three Idiomela, Glory, Now and ever, “To Peter, James and
John.” The Apolytikion “You were transfigured upon the mountain

*(Printed Page 627)*

=== LEAF p643 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Holy Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ (August 6, Concl. § 1, §§ 2–3, Antiphons 1 & 2) (p. 628)]

628

᾿Απόλυσις Ὁ ἐν τῷ Ὄρει τῷ Θαβὼρ μεταμορφωθεὶς ἐν δόξῃ
ἐνώπιον τῶν ἁγίων αὑτοῦ Μαθητῶν καὶ ᾿Αποστόλων Χριστὸς
ὁ ἀληθινός.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἶτα
τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ
Πολυέλεος Αἰνεῖτε τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν
ἐκ δευτέρου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ ᾿Αντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον
Θαβὼρ καὶ Ἑρμὼν ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί σου ἀγαλλιάσονται, τὸ Πᾶσα
πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον (᾿Ανάστασιν Χριστοῦ οὐ λέγομεν, ἀλλ᾿ εὐθὺς
ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα), Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν ᾿Αποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς
τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ὁ
φωτί σου ἅπασαν (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν). Εἶτα οἱ Κανόνες ἄνευ στίχων·
ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα ἅπαξ· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς
καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας, εἶτα ψάλλεται
ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ καὶ τῶν δύο κανόνων, ἡ Καταβασία Μυστικὸς εἶ, Θεοτόκε,
παράδεισος, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον ἐκ γ΄. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ γ΄
Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Παρέλαβεν ὁ Χριστός, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ ᾿Αντίφωνα.

᾿Αντίφωνον Α΄.

      Μέγας Κύριος καὶ αἰνετὸς σφόδρα ἐν
πόλει τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡμῶν.
      Ἑτοιμάζων ὄρη ἐν τῇ ἰσχύϊ αὑτοῦ.
      Ὁ ἀναβαλλόμενος φῶς ὡς
ἱμάτιον.
      Τὰ ὄρη ἀγαλλιάσονται ἀπὸ
προσώπου Κυρίου.
      [Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου.]

᾿Αντίφωνον Β΄.

      Οἱ θεμέλιοι αὐτοῦ ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσι
τοῖς ἁγίοις.
      ᾿Αγαπᾷ Κύριος τὰς πύλας Σιών,
ὑπὲρ πάντα τὰ σκηνώματα Ἰακώβ.
      Δεδοξασμένα ἐλαλήθη περὶ σοῦ
ἡ πόλις τοῦ Θεοῦ.
      [Σῶσον ἡμᾶς... ὁ ἐν τῷ ὄρει τῷ Θαβὼρ μεταμορφωθείς...]

------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Ἐν τῷ Ἁγιορειτικῷ Τυπικῷ ἀντὶ Ταῖς τῶν Ἀποστόλων σημειοῦται τὸ ἀκόλουθον·
Δόξα, Τὰ σύμπαντα σήμερον χαρᾶς πληροῦνται, Χριστοῦ ὀφθέντος ἐν
Θαβωρίῳ. Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὅπερ φαίνεται προελθὸν ἐξ ἀπομιμήσεως τῶν ἑορτῶν
Χριστουγέννων καὶ Θεοφανείων.

*(Printed Page 628)*

=== LEAF p644 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Holy Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ (August 6, Concl. § 1, §§ 2–3, Antiphons 1 & 2) (p. 629)]

629

(thrice), and Dismissal “May Christ our true God, who was transfigured on
Mount Tabor, in glory, before His holy Disciples and Apostles.”
2.    At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Feast, then the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion as in
Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos “Praise the name of the Lord.”
The Kathismata in order (twice each), the Anavathmi of the First Antiphon of
Mode IV, the Prokimenon “Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in Your name.”
Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Morning [Matins] Gospel (we do
not recite “Having beheld the Resurrection,” but we read immediately Psalm
50). Glory,² “Through the intercessions of the Apostles,” Now and ever,
“Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “Have mercy on
me, O God” and the Idiomelon “By Your light, the entire [universe]” (see
the Liti). Then the Canons without verses. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma
(once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast and the
Minologion. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,”
then the 9th Ode of both Canons and the Katavasia “O Theotokos, you are a
mystical paradise.” The Exapostilarion (thrice). At the Praises: the three
Prosomia in 4, Glory, Now and ever, “Christ took with Him,” Great Doxology
and the Apolytikion.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

ANTIPHON ONE

      Great is the Lord and greatly
to be praised in the city of our God.
      By your strength you established
the mountains.
      You are clothed with light as with a
garment.
      Let the hills sing together for joy at the
presence of the Lord.
      [Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, Savior, save us!]

ANTIPHON TWO

      His foundations are in the holy
mountains.
      The Lord loves the gates of Zion
more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
      Glorious things are spoken of you,
O city of God.
      [Save us... who was transfigured upon Mount Tabor...]

------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. The Agioritic Typikon notes that, instead of “Through the intercessions of the Apostles,” we sing Glory,
“Today all things are filled with joy, Christ being seen on Tabor,” Now and ever, repeat the same—a
practice of repetition which came about apparently in imitation of the Feasts of Christmas and Epiphany.

*(Printed Page 629)*

=== LEAF p645 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Holy Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ (August 6, Concl. § 3, Antiphons 2 concl. & 3, Isodikon, Liturgy concl., Evening Great Prokeimenon); Saturday after the Feast (§ 4) (p. 630)]

630

      Μήτηρ Σιών, ἐρεῖ ἄνθρωπος·
καὶ ἄνθρωπος ἐγεννήθη ἐν αὐτῇ.
      Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ μονογενὴς
Υἱός, καὶ Λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ.

᾿Αντίφωνον Γ΄.

      Τὰ ἐλέη σου, Κύριε, εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα
ᾄσομαι.
      Ἐξομολογήσονται οἱ οὐρανοὶ τὰ
θαυμάσιά σου, Κύριε.
      Μακάριος ὁ λαὸς ὁ γινώσκων
ἀλαλαγμόν.
      Κύριε, ἐν τῷ φωτὶ τοῦ προσώπου
σου πορεύσονται, καὶ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί σου
ἀγαλλιάσονται ὅλην τὴν ἡμέραν.
      [Μετεμορφώθης ἐν τῷ ὄρει.]

      Εἰσοδικὸν Ὅτι παρὰ σοὶ πηγὴ ζωῆς, Κύριε, ἐν τῷ φωτί σου
ὀψόμεθα φῶς . . . Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν τῷ ὄρει τῷ Θαβὼρ
μεταμορφωθείς . . . τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς,
τὸ Τρισάγιον, ὁ ᾿Απόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως
τὸ Νῦν τὰ ἀνήκουστα ἠκούσθη³ (ζήτει ἐν τῇ ζ΄ Ὠδῇ), Κοινωνικὸν Ἐν
τῷ φωτὶ τῆς δόξης τοῦ προσώπου σου, Μετεμορφώθης ἐν τῷ Ὄρει,
καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
      Τὸ ἑσπέρας τῆς ἑορτῆς, οἱαδήποτε ἡμέρα καὶ ἂν ᾖ, ἀντὶ
τοῦ Προκειμένου τῆς ἡμέρας ψάλλεται τὸ Μ. Προκείμενον Ὁ Θεὸς
ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ.

Σαββάτῳ μετὰ τὴν ἑορτήν.

4.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, ὁ Ἑσπερινὸς ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν
σειρὰν τοῦ Μηναίου καὶ ἐν τῷ τέλει ἡ Παράκλησις, ᾿Απολυτίκιον
Μετεμορφώθης ἐν τῷ ὄρει, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεός,
κτλ. καὶ ἡ ᾿Απόλυσις.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Τοῦτο ἤδη συνειθίσθη· ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ἀκρίβεια ἀπαιτεῖ τὸν Εἱρμὸν τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς Ὁ τόκος
σου ἄφθορος ἐδείχθη, διότι τοῦτο ἐστι κυρίως Θεοτοκίον, καὶ μετὰ τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως
ἐν πάσαις ταῖς Δεσποτικαῖς ἑορταῖς λέγεται Εἱρμὸς Θεοτοκίον.

*(Printed Page 630)*

=== LEAF p646 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Holy Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ (August 6, Concl. § 3, Antiphons 2 concl. & 3, Isodikon, Liturgy concl., Evening Great Prokeimenon); Saturday after the Feast (§ 4) (p. 631)]

631

      Zion is our mother, a man shall say,
and such a man was born in her.
      Glory [to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit,] now and
ever [and unto ages of ages.] Amen. O Only-begotten Son and Word
of God ...

ANTIPHON THREE

      I will sing of Your mercies for ever, O Lord.
      Let the heavens praise your wonders, O Lord.
      Blessed is the people that know the sound of joy.
      They shall walk, O Lord, in the light of your
countenance; in Your Name they shall rejoice all the
day.
      [You were transfigured upon the mountain.]

      Entrance Hymn: For with You is the fountain of life, O Lord, and in
Your light shall we see light. O Son of God, transfigured upon Mount
Tabor, [save us who sing to You, Alleluia!]. The Apolytikion and
Kontakion of the Feast, the Trisagios Hymn, the Apostolos and the Gospel.
At “Especially,” the “Now the unheard of has been heard”³ (see the 7th
Ode), Communion Hymn “In the light of the glory of Your face,” [the
Apolytikion] “You were transfigured upon the mountain,” and Dismissal.
      On the evening of the Feast, regardless of what day it is, instead of
the Prokimenon of the day, the Great Prokimenon “Our God in heaven and
on earth” with its verses is sung.

Saturday after the Feast.

4.    On Friday evening, Vespers is sung according to the order of the
Mineon and at the end the Paraklisis. Apolytikion “You were transfigured
upon the mountain”; the Priest, “Have mercy on us, O God,” etc., and the
Dismissal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. The use of this hymn at this point has already become customary. The exact order of service,
however, calls here for the Irmos of the 9th Ode “Your birth-giving was shown to be undefiled.”
This is because the “Now the unheard...” is primarily a Theotokion and because, at “Especially”
in all Feasts of the Lord, we chant the Irmos of the Theotokos [i.e. the Irmos of the 9th Ode].

*(Printed Page 631)*

=== LEAF p647 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Saturday after the Feast (Concl. §§ 5–6); Sunday after the Feast (Heading, §§ 7–8, § 9 Opening) (p. 632)]

632

5.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν καὶ τὴν τακτικὴν
᾿Ακολουθίαν τοῦ Ὄρθρου, εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ εἰς τὴν Θ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς
Ἑσπέρια Τῆς παναγίας ἐνδόξου Μεταμορφώσεως εἰς δ΄, Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ φωτί σου ἅπασαν τὴν οἰκουμένην ἁγιάσας, Σοὶ
δόξα πρέπει· μετὰ τὴν Ἐκτενῆ, τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα Ἐν ὄρει τῷ
Θαβώρ, (ζήτει τῇ Θ΄ τοῦ μηνός) καὶ τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ ᾿Αντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς Σῶσον ἡμᾶς
Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν τῷ ὄρει τῷ Θαβὼρ μεταμορφωθείς. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἐν τῷ ὄρει τῷ Θαβώρ. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω,
Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

Κυριακῇ μετὰ τὴν ἑορτήν.

7.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον,
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄, Δόξα,
Δεῦτε ἀναβῶμεν εἰς τὸ ὄρος Κυρίου (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), Καὶ νῦν,
τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς
ἑορτῆς, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον
τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
8.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
᾿Απολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ· εἶτα τὸ
Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ μεθέορτα
ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ
ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, καὶ ὁ εἷς τῆς
ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα μεθέορτον ἅπαξ, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ
Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν
χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον
καὶ μεθέορτον ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ
μεθέορτα δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
9.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους μετεμορφώθης,

*(Printed Page 632)*

=== LEAF p648 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Saturday after the Feast (Concl. §§ 5–6); Sunday after the Feast (Heading, §§ 7–8, § 9 Opening) (p. 633)]

633

5.    On Saturday, after the Midnight Service and the Order of the
Matins, at the Praises: the hymns from Vespers of 9 August “Of the all-
holy and glorious Transfiguration” (in 4), Glory, Now and ever, “You
sanctified the whole world with Your light.” “To You belongs all glory”;
after the Ektenis [Litany of Petitions], the Aposticha “On Mount Tabor”
(see the 9th of the month) and the Apolytikion.
6.    At the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast “O Son of God, who was
transfigured upon Mount Tabor . . .” After the Entrance, “O come let us
worship . . . on Mount Tabor.” At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion
Hymn “Blessed are those whom You have chosen,” “We have seen the
[true] light,” and Dismissal.

Sunday after the Feast.

7.    On Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the
Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and
4 of the Post-feast. Glory, “Come, let us ascend onto the mountain of the
Lord,” (see the Liti), Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode.
Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever of the Feast “Lord, now let,”
then the Trisagion. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast (once),
and Dismissal.
8.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and
the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion
(twice) and the Feast’s (once), then the Psalter and the Amomos. The
Resurrection Kathismata in order, and those of the Post-feast in place of the
Theotokia. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and
the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and the first of the Feast.
After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Post-feast (once); after the 6th Ode,
the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The
Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the entire
order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria:
of the Resurrection and that of the Post-feast (once). At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Post-feast, Glory the Eothinon, Now and
ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
9.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast, of the Saint of the Church and
Kontakion “You were transfigured upon the mountain.” Apostolos and

*(Printed Page 633)*

=== LEAF p649 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Sunday after the Feast (Concl. § 9); The Apodosis of the Feast (August 13, Heading, §§ 10–12, § 13 Opening) (p. 634)]

634

᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
      Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας, ὁ τῆς σειρᾶς Ἑσπερινὸς ψάλλεται
κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τοῦ Μηναίου, γίνεται Εἴσοδος, καὶ μετὰ τὸ Νῦν
ἀπολύεις ψάλλεται ἡ Μεγάλη Παράκλησις ὡς εἴθισται.

Ἡ ᾿Απόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς.

10.   Τῇ ΙΓ΄ τοῦ αὐτοῦ μηνός, ἡ ᾿Ακολουθία ψάλλεται ἀπαραλλάκτως
ὡς ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐξαιρουμένων ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῶν
᾿Αναγνωσμάτων, καὶ ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ τῆς Λιτῆς, τοῦ Πολυελέου καὶ τοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου· ἐν δὲ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τὰ τῆς
ἡμέρας.
11.   Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ᾿Απόδοσις ἐν Κυριακῇ τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ
τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα ς΄, Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ
νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς,
Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς
δίς, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
12.   Τῇ Κυριακῇ, εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον
τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ ᾿Απολυτίκια
ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ
Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ
᾿Αναστάσιμος, καὶ οἱ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς
ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ
Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ
Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, καὶ
ψάλλεται καὶ ἡ Θ΄ [Ὠδὴ] τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον
καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς
δ΄, Δόξα, Παρέλαβεν ὁ Χριστός, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη,
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
13.   Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ ᾿Αντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς· εἰς τὸ β΄ Ὁ
ἐν τῷ ὄρει τῷ Θαβώρ, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ὅτι παρὰ σοὶ πηγὴ . . . μετὰ
τοῦ Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς

*(Printed Page 634)*

=== LEAF p650 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Sunday after the Feast (Concl. § 9); The Apodosis of the Feast (August 13, Heading, §§ 10–12, § 13 Opening) (p. 635)]

635

Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn
“Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.
      That Sunday evening, the Vespers in the whole sequence of the
Feast’s services is sung according to the order of the Mineon. Entrance is
made, and after “Lord, now let” the Great Paraklisis is chanted as is the
custom.

The Leave-taking of the Feast.

10.   On the 13th of this month the Service [of the Leave-taking] is sung
exactly as on the day of the Feast, with the following exceptions: the
Readings in Vespers; and, the Liti, the Polyeleos and the Gospel in Matins.
In the Liturgy, we recite the Apostolos and Gospel of the day.
11.   If the Leave-taking occurs on Sunday, on Saturday evening, follow-
ing the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing
4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 of the Feast. Glory of the Feast, Now
and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light”
and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory,
Now and ever of the Feast. Then “Lord, now let” and the Trisagion. The
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast (twice), and Dismissal.
12.   On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and
the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then
the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and
those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi,
the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the
Resurrection and the two of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of
the Feast (once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the
Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched
the sign of the Cross,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we
sing “More honorable,” and the 9th [Ode] of the Feast. Exapostilaria: of
the Resurrection and of the Feast (twice). At the Praises: 4 Resurrection
Stichira and 4 of the Feast, Glory, “Christ took with Him,” Now and ever,
“Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
13.   In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast; at the 2nd “who on
Mount Tabor.” The Entrance Hymn “For with You is the fountain of life,”
with “who is risen from the dead.” After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of

*(Printed Page 635)*
