=== LEAF p1151 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Priest: Epitrachelion Concluded – Zoni – Epimanikia Part 1) (p. 1136 / TD-157)]

TD-157

When vesting with the Epitrachilion, the Priest signs a cross over it and prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Blessed is God Who pours His grace upon His Priests, as ointment upon the head, which runs down over the beard, the beard of Aaron, runs down to the hem of his garment (Psalm 132(133):2); Always, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, ὁ ἐκχέων τὴν χάριν αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοὺς ἱερεῖς αὐτοῦ· ὡς μύρον ἐπὶ κεφαλῆς, τὸ καταβαῖνον ἐπὶ πώγωνα, τὸν πώγωνα τοῦ Ἀαρών, τὸ καταβαῖνον ἐπὶ τὴν ᾤαν τοῦ ἐνδύματος αὐτοῦ (Ψαλμὸς 132 (133)·2)· Πάντοτε νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The ZONI (Ζώνη, ἡ) Slav. Poyas) is a cloth belt with which the Priest girds himself about his Epitrachilion and Sticharion to keep them in place for convenience in serving. It is symbolic of the gift of strength with which God aids him in his service, and exhorts him to blamelessness of life. It also denotes the priest’s readiness to serve the Lord and that he is bound to Christ. In putting on this belt he prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Blessed is God Who girds me with strength, and has made my way blameless (Psalm 17(18):32); now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, ὁ περιζωννύων με δύναμιν· καὶ ἔθετο ἄμωμον τὴν ὁδόν μου. (Ψαλμὸς 17 (18)·32) Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The EPIMANIKIA (Ἐπιμανίκια, τά) have also been called Epimanika or Ypomanika: These are the cuffs which are also worn by the DEACON; however, while the Deacon laces them around the wrists under the the STICHARION, the Priest wears them laced over the STICHARION. When vesting with the cuffs, the priest’s prayers are: first for the right hand “Your right hand, O Lord, is glorified in strength; Your right hand, O Lord, has vanquished the enemy, and in the multitude of Your glory have You crushed the adversaries (Exodus 15:6). Always, now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.” («Ἡ δεξιά σου, Κύριε, δεδόξασται ἐν ἰσχύϊ· ἡ δεξιά σου χείρ, Κύριε, ἔθραυσεν

*(Printed Page TD-157)*

=== LEAF p1152 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Priest: Epimanikia Concluded – Epigonation / Palitsa / Nabedrennik Part 1) (p. 1137 / TD-158)]

TD-158

ἐχθρούς· καὶ τῷ πλήθει τῆς δόξης σου συνέτριψας τοὺς ὑπεναντίους. (Ἐξόδου 15·6) Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.») And then for the left hand, he prays: “Your hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding that I may learn Your commandments. (Ps. 118:73). Always, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Αἱ χεῖρές σου ἐποίησάν με καὶ ἔπλασάν με· συνέτισόν με καὶ μαθήσομαι τὰς ἐντολάς σου· (Ψαλμὸς 118·73) Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.») The cuffs symbolize the bonds endured by Christ at His passion and serve as a reminder that a minister of the Church must rely not on his own strength, but on the help of God.

    The EPIGONATION (Ἐπιγονάτιον, τό or Ὑπογονάτιον, τό), Slav. Palitsa) is a stiffened diamond shaped piece of brocade, which is suspended from the ZONI as an award of distinction for a priest. Its origin is traced to the practice of Byzantine Emperors awarding ceremonial swords to their military commanders in recognition of their valor in defending the empire. Such swords were often used with an elaborate thigh-shield which was suspended from the belt under the sword and protected the leg from bruising caused by the constant bumping of the sword against the thigh. The Epigonation represents the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. It has also been explained as being symbolic of the towel with which the Lord girded himself to wash the disciples’ feet. In the Slavic traditions, those priests honored to wear the Epigonation or Palitsa may also be honored to wear the Thigh-shield (Slav. Nabedrennik). The Nabedrennik is also a stiffened brocaded fabric, rectangular in shape and worn over the right hip, suspended by a strap drawn over the left shoulder and attached to the two upper corners. It is not worn in the Byzantine Greek tradition. In Slav use, the Palitsa is worn over the right hip; however, if the Priest has also been awarded the use of a Nabedrennik, the Palitsa is worn over the left hip.

    As the Priest vests with the Epigonation he prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Gird your sword at your thigh, mighty one, in your splendor and beauty. Stretch out your bowstrings, go

*(Printed Page TD-158)*

=== LEAF p1153 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Priest: Epigonation Concluded – Felonion – Bishop: Sticharion Part 1) (p. 1138 / TD-159)]

TD-159

forth and prevail in the cause of truth, gentleness and justice, and may your right hand lead you to wondrous deeds (Psalm 44 (45): 3-4); now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Περίζωσαι τὴν ῥομφαίαν σου ἐπὶ τὸν μηρόν σου, Δυνατέ, τῇ ὡραιότητί σου καὶ τῷ κάλλει σου· καὶ ἔντεινε, καὶ κατευοδοῦ, καὶ βασίλευε ἕνεκεν ἀληθείας, καὶ πραότητος, καὶ δικαιοσύνης· καὶ ὁδηγήσει σε θαυμαστῶς ἡ δεξιά σου (Ψαλμὸς 44 (45)· 3-4.) Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The FELONION (Φελόνιον, τό) is the distinguishing vestment of the Priest. It is a long, sleveless conical vestment similar to a cape, shortened in front to facilitate the movement of his hands and with an opening for his head. The Felonion is worn over all the other vestments.

    It is symbolic of the robe Christ wore during His Passion. It is also a reminder that the Priest is “clothed with righteousness (Psalm 131:9) and thus protected from all iniquities. It was for a few centuries also worn by bishops until it was replaced by the SAKKOS. The Felonion is similar to the Western Chasuble.

    When vesting with the Felonion, the priest reverences the Cross on the back of the Felonion as he prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. May Your priests Lord, be clothed in righteousness, and Your faithful ones rejoice (Psalm 131 (132):9); now and ever and unto all ages of ages. Amen.” («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Οἱ ἱερεῖς Σου, Κύριε, ἐνδύσονται δικαιοσύνην, καὶ οἱ ὅσιοί Σου ἀγαλλιάσει ἀγαλλιάσονται (Ψαλμὸς 131 (132)·9). Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    Bishop (Ἐπίσκοπος, ὁ) The BISHOP wears all the vestments of a Priest, save the FELONION.

    As the Bishop vests with the Sticharion, the 1st Deacon prays: “Bless, master, the holy Sticharion. let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy.” («Εὐλόγησον, δέσποτα, τὸ ἱερὸν στιχάριον. Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον.») Then he

*(Printed Page TD-159)*

=== LEAF p1154 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Bishop: Sticharion Concluded – Epitrachelion – Zoni – Epimanikia Part 1) (p. 1139 / TD-160)]

TD-160

continues “I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for He has clothed me with the garments of salvation, He has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decks himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorns herself with her jewels.” Isaiah 61:10 («Ἀγαλλιάσεται ἡ ψυχή μου ἐπὶ τῷ Κυρίῳ. ἐνέδυσε γὰρ με ἱμάτιον σωτηρίου, καὶ χιτῶνας εὐφροσύνης περιέβαλέ με· ὡς νυμφίῳ περιέθηκέ μοι μίτραν, καὶ ὡς νύμφην κατεκόσμησε με κόσμῳ.») (Ψαλμὸς 44 (45)· 3-4) The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer with “Always, now and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    As the bishop vests with the STOLE (EPITRACHILION) the 1st Deacon prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Blessed is God Who pours out His grace upon His priests like the oil of myrrh upon the head, which runs down upon the beard, upon the beard of Aaron, which runs down to the fringe of his raiment.” (Psalm 132:2) («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, ὁ ἐκχέων τὴν χάριν αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοὺς ἱερεῖς αὐτοῦ, ὡς μύρον ἐπὶ κεφαλῆς, τὸ καταβαῖνον ἐπὶ πώγωνα, τὸν πώγωνα τοῦ Ἀαρών, τὸ καταβαῖνον ἐπὶ τὴν ᾤαν τοῦ ἐνδύματος αὐτοῦ.») (Ψαλμὸς 132·2) He then completes the prayer with “Always, now and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε, νῦν, καὶ ἀεί, καὶ τίς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    As the bishop vests with the Belt (Ζώνη) the 1st Deacon prays: “Let us pray to the Lord, Lord, have mercy. Blessed is God Who girds me with strengh, and has made my way blameless (Psalm 17 (18):32); («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, ο περιζωννύων με δύναμιν· καὶ ἔθετο ἄμωμον τὴν ὁδόν μου. (Ψαλμὸς 17 (18)·32) The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer with “Always, now and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    As the bishop vests with the wrist Cuffs (Epimanikia) the 1st

*(Printed Page TD-160)*

=== LEAF p1155 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Bishop: Epimanikia Concluded – Sakkos) (p. 1140 / TD-161)]

TD-161

Deacon prays first for the Right Cuff: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Your right hand, O Lord, is glorified in strength; Your right hand, O Lord, has vanquished the enemy, and in the multitude of Your glory You have crushed the adversaries (Exodus 15:6-7). («Ἡ δεξιά Σου, Κύριε, δεδόξασται ἐν ἰσχύϊ· ἡ δεξιά Σου χείρ, Κύριε, ἔθραυσεν ἐχθρούς· καὶ τῷ πλήθει τῆς δόξης Σου συνέτριψας τοὺς ὑπεναντίους. (Ἐξόδου 15·6) The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer with "Always, now and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The 1st Deacon then prays for the Left Cuff “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Your hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding and I will learn Your commandments.” (Psalm 118:73) («Αἱ χεῖρές Σου ἐποίησάν με καὶ ἔπλασάν με· συνέτισόν με καὶ μαθήσομαι τὰς ἐντολάς Σου· (Ψαλμὸς 118·73.) The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer saying “Always, now and ever, and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.») The cuffs symbolize the bonds endured by Christ at His passion and serve as a reminder that a minister of the Church must rely not on his own strength, but on the help of God.

    The SAKKOS (Σάκκος, ὁ), meaning a “sackcloth garment” or “garment of humility”: Liturgically, except for the FELONION, the Bishop wears all the vestments of a priest. Originally the bishop also wore the FELONION but it was later replaced by the Sakkos, a garment like a short tunic with half-sleeves, fashioned in all likelihood after the vestment of a Byzantine emperor; as such it is a sign of special distinction and honor. Symbolically it serves as a reminder that the Bishop must rise to holiness of life. As the Bishop is vested with the Sakkos, the 1st Deacon prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Your Priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Your righteous shall rejoice.” (Psalm 132:9). («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Σου, Κύριε, ἐνδύσονται δικαιοσύνην καὶ οἱ ὅσιοί Σου ἀγαλλιάσει ἀγαλλιάσονται.») (Ψαλμὸς 132·9). The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer saying: “Always, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

*(Printed Page TD-161)*

=== LEAF p1156 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Bishop: Epigonation / Palitsa / Nabedrennik – Omoforion Part 1) (p. 1141 / TD-162)]

TD-162

The EPIGONATION (Ἐπιγονάτιον, τό or Ὑπογονάτιον, τό), Slav. Palitsa is a stiffened diamond shaped piece of brocade, which is suspended from the ZONI by all Bishops. It is an award of distinction for a priest. Its origin is traced to the practice of Byzantine Emperors awarding ceremonial swords to their military commanders in recognition of their valor in defending the empire. Such swords were often used with an elaborate thigh-shield which was suspended from the belt under the sword and protected the leg from bruising caused by the constant bumping of the sword against the thigh. The Epigonation represents the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. It has also been explained as being symbolic of the towel with which the Lord girded himself to wash the disciples’ feet. In the Slavic traditions, those priests honored to wear the Epigonation or Palitsa may also be honored to wear the Thigh-shield (Slav. Nabedrennik). It is also a stiffened brocaded fabric, rectangular in shape and worn over the right hip, suspended by a strap drawn over the left shoulder and attached to the two upper corners. It is not worn in the Byzantine Greek tradition. In Slav use, the Palitsa is worn over the right hip; however, if the Priest has also been awarded a Nabedrennik, the Palitsa is worn over the left hip.

    As the Bishop vests with the Epigonation, the 1st Deacon prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Gird your sword upon your thigh, mighty One, in your splendor and beauty. Stretch out your bowstrings, go forth and rule in the cause of truth, gentleness and justice, and may your right hand lead you to wondrous deeds.” (Psalm 44 (45): 3-4); («Περίζωσαι τὴν ῥομφαίαν σου ἐπὶ τὸν μηρόν σου, Δυνατέ, τῇ ὡραιότητί σου καὶ τῷ κάλλει σου· καὶ ἔντεινε, καὶ κατευοδοῦ, καὶ βασίλευε ἕνεκεν ἀληθείας, καὶ πραότητος, καὶ δικαιοσύνης· καὶ ὁδηγήσει σε θαυμαστῶς ἡ δεξιά σου.») (Ψαλμὸς 44 (45) 3·4. The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer saying: “Always, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The distinctive vestment of the Bishop is the OMOFORION, sometimes spelled Omophorion (Ὠμοφόριον, τό)—a long, broad strip arranged on the shoulders in such a way that one end descends in front and the other behind. There are two forms of the Omoforion seen in services, the Long version and the Short version. Typically, the Long version is

*(Printed Page TD-162)*

=== LEAF p1157 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Bishop: Omoforion Concluded – Pectoral Cross Part 1) (p. 1142 / TD-163)]

TD-163

worn when the Bishop is vested for the liturgy up to the the time of the reading of the Gospel. Thereafter he is revested with the short version. The word Omoforion meaning “shoulder covering” originally referred to a piece of sheepskin worn over the shoulders by the aged and infirmed for warmth. Later it was made out of the same material as the rest of the vestments, but its origin still recalls the parable of the lost sheep which the good shepherd found and laid on his shoulders. So too, the bishop is entrusted to safely guide his flock and be mindful of the conversion of the erring. The Omoforion is the symbol of the Bishop’s spiritual and ecclesiastical authority and clergy and ecclesiastical institutions subject to a bishop’s authority are said to be “under his Omoforion.”

    The equivalent vestment for the Omoforion in the usage of Western (Roman) Christianity is the archiepiscopal pallium or pal, the use of which is subject to different rubrics and restrictions, while all Orthodox bishops wear the Omoforion.

    The rise of Byzantium and the close relationship of the Church and State had a marked influence on the further development of Orthodox vestments which have essentially remained in the same form up to today.

    As the Bishop is vested with the Omoforion, the 1st Deacon initially prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. When You did take upon Your shoulders human nature which had gone astray, O Christ, You did bear it to heaven, to God Your Father.” («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων, Χριστέ, τὴν πλανηθεῖσαν ἄρας φύσιν, ἀναληφθεὶς τῷ Θεῷ καὶ Πατρὶ προσήγαγες.») The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer saying “Always, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The Pectoral Cross is the next vestment which the Bishop wears. It hangs by a decorative chain around the neck and on the chest (Latin pectus).

    As the Bishop is vested with the Pectoral Cross, the 1st Dea-

*(Printed Page TD-163)*

=== LEAF p1158 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Bishop: Pectoral Cross Concluded – Engolpion / Panagia / Medallions Part 1) (p. 1143 / TD-164)]

TD-164

con prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Whosoever will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.” (Mark 8:34) («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Εἴ τις θέλει ὀπίσω Μου ἐλθεῖν, ἀπαρνησάσθω ἑαυτὸν καὶ ἀράτω τὸν σταυρὸν αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἀκολουθείτω Μοι.») The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer saying “Always, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The Engolpion (In Greek, something ‘worn on the chest’) is worn by both priests and bishops as a reminder that they should not merely carry Christ in their hearts, but also confess Him in the face of all men. Engolpion formerly also included pectoral crosses; however, today, the word Engolpion is used for a medallion with an icon in the center, worn as a vestment by Orthodox and Eastern Catholic bishops. Some Engolpia are hollow, for use as a reliquary. All bishops wear a particular kind of Engolpion called the Panagia (see below).

    When the Bishop is vested with the First Medallion (Ἐγκόλπιον α΄) or the Panagia (Παναγία, ἡ) or All-holy one—a small, circular Holy Image (Icon) of our Savior and the Birth-giver of God which hangs by a gold chain from the neck over the chest by a Bishop and reminds the Bishop that he must always bear in his heart the Lord and His holy Mother (the Theotokos or Panagia), the Intercessor before God; and, to that end, the Bishop’s heart must be pure and his spirit upright. When a bishop vests with the engolpion, the 2nd Deacon prays: “Let us pray to the Lord.” («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.») The 1st Deacon then prays “Lord, have mercy” («Κύριε, ἐλέησον.») and continues “Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. (Psalm 50:10) («Καρδίαν καθαρὰν κτίσον ἐν ἐμοί, ὁ Θεός, καὶ πνεῦμα εὐθὲς ἐγκαίνισον ἐν τοῖς ἐγκάτοις μου.») The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer saying “Always, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    When the Bishop is vested with the Second Medallion (Ἐγκόλπιον β΄) the 1st Deacon prays “Let us pray to the

*(Printed Page TD-164)*

=== LEAF p1159 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Continued – Bishop: Second Medallion Concluded – Miter – Pastoral Staff / Posokh Part 1) (p. 1144 / TD-165)]

TD-165

Lord. Lord, have mercy. My heart has poured forth a good word; I speak of my works to the king.” (Psalm 45:2) («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία μου Λόγον ἀγαθόν, λέγω ἐγὼ τὰ ἔργα μου τῷ βασιλεῖ.») The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer saying “Always, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The Bishop’s liturgical head covering is the Episcopal Crown or Miter (MITRA).

    The MITER (Μίτρα, ἡ), spelled by some as Mitre, is a richly embroidered crown or diadem representing the crown of thorns worn by Christ at His passion and serving as an emblem of the power bestowed upon the Bishop as minister of the Church. It is worn by all those in episcopal office and is modeled after the crown worn by Byzantine emperors.

    It is highly unlikely that it was modeled after the Old Testament miter since it was not adopted by bishops of the Church until the 15th century. While in the Greek Orthodox Church the Miter is only worn by a hierarch, in more recent centuries the Russian Orthodox Church has allowed the Miter to be given to some archimandrites and archpriests as an honorary distinction.

    As the Bishop puts on the Miter, the 1st Deacon prays: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. The Lord has set upon your head a crown of precious stones; You asked life of Him and He gave you length of days.” («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Ἔθηκας ἐπί τήν κεφαλήν αὐτοῦ στέφανον ἐκ λίθων τιμίων· ζωήν ᾐτήσατό Σε καὶ ἔδωκας αὐτῷ μακρότητα ἡμερῶν.») The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer: “Always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The Pastoral Staff (ποιμαντορικὴ ῥάβδος, ἡ) or western Crozier (Slav. Posokh), is given to Bishops and in some Slavic churches to Archimandrites, in token of their spiritual authority over the monasteries

*(Printed Page TD-165)*

=== LEAF p1160 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Vestments Concluded – Bishop: Pastoral Staff Concluded – Dikerotrikera – Eagle / Aetos / Orlets) (p. 1145 / TD-166)]

TD-166

or cities to which they minister and as a sign that it behooves them to feed the flock of Christ. The staff is of metal and at the top is made to resemble the heads of two serpents thus recalling the Savior’s words: “Be you wise as serpents.” As a serpent each year forces its way through thorny plants to shed its old skin, so also must the Bishop lead others and follow himself along the thorny path which leads to the renewal of one’s soul.

    When the Bishop receives the Staff, the 2nd Deacon prays: “Let us pray to the Lord.” («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.») The 1st Deacon prays: “Lord, have mercy.” («Κύριε, ἐλέησον.») The 2nd Deacon then prays: “The Staff of strength is sent out, Lord of Zion, and....” («Ῥάβδον δυνάμεως ἐξαποστελεῖ Σοι Κύριος ἐκ Σιὼν καὶ κατακυρίευε ἐν μέσῳ τῶν ἐχθρῶν Σου.») The 2nd Deacon then completes the prayer: “Always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    When the Bishop receives the 2- and 3-branched candelabras (Δικηροτρίκηρα, τά) the 1st Deacon prays saying: “Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father Who is in heaven.” (Matthew 5:16) («Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Οὕτω λαμψάτω τὸ φῶς ἡμῶν ἔμπροσθεν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ὅπως ἴδωσιν ἡμῶν τὰ καλὰ ἔργα.») The 2nd Deacon concludes the prayer with “Always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.” («Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.»)

    The Eagle or AETOS (Ἀετός, ὁ) Slav. Orlets is a small round or oval rug, with the representation of a one-headed eagle soaring over a city. A Bishop stands on this rug during divine service, and to him alone is its use accorded. He is led upon a large “Eagle” at his consecration, as the Service of Consecration sets forth. The view of the city suggests the Bishop’s rule over the city while the Eagle denotes the loftiness and purity of his teaching. Thus, the Eagle-rug spread for a Bishop to stand upon signifies that he, by his life and doctrine, must resemble the eagle, which with its excellent vision soars above all lower things, and aspires unto heaven.

*(Printed Page TD-166)*
