=== LEAF p881 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of Church Consecration Concluded and The Ceremony of Consecration (p. 866)]

866

Ἐγκαινίων, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα
γ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄, καὶ β΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων, ἡ Μεγάλη Δοξολογία καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
   Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον ἐν ἑκάστῃ τῶν προταχθεισῶν
περιπτώσεων ὁρίζονται ὑπὸ τοῦ Τελετουργοῦ ἀναλόγως τῆς
τυχούσης ἑορτῆς.

Η ΤΕΛΕΤΗ ΤΩΝ ΕΓΚΑΙΝΙΩΝ

   Ὀφείλει ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἔχειν προητοιμασμένα τὰ ἀπαιτούμενα
εἰς τὴν καθιέρωσιν καὶ τὸν Ἐγκαινιασμὸν τοῦ Ναοῦ διάφορα εἴδη
ὡς ἐν τῷ Εὐχολογίῳ σημειοῦνται· καὶ ἀφ’ ἑσπέρας ἀπέρχεται μετὰ
τοῦ Κλήρου εἰς τὸν νέον Ναὸν καὶ καταρτίζει πρὸ τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ
τὰ ἅγια Λείψανα εἰς μερίδας τρεῖς ἐπὶ τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης· καὶ
τεθέντων τούτων ἔνδον τοῦ Δισκαρίου καὶ ἄνωθεν ἀστερίσκου καὶ
καλυφθέντων μετὰ καλύμματος, ποιεῖ Εὐλογητόν, τὸ Τρισάγιον,
Ὅτι σοῦ, καὶ ψάλλονται τὰ Τροπάρια Οἱ μάρτυρές σου Κύριε,
Ἀθλοφόροι Κυρίου, τοὺς Μάρτυρας Χριστοῦ, τὸ τῆς ἡμέρας
Τροπάριον, εἶτα τὸ Ὡς ἀπ’ ἀρχὰς τῆς φύσεως, Δόξα,
Μαρτύρων θεῖος χορός, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος,
μετὰ τῶν Ἀθλοφόρων, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Καὶ εἰ μέν ἐστι πλησίον
ἄλλος Ναὸς ἐγκαινιασμένος, μεταφέρει ταῦτα ἐν αὐτῷ πρὸ τοῦ
Ἑσπερινοῦ, καὶ τίθησιν ἐπὶ τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης, ἔνθα καὶ καίει
κηρὸς δι’ ὅλης τῆς νυκτός· ψάλλεται δὲ Λυχνικὸν καὶ παννυχὶς1
ἐν τῷ Ναῷ τῷ ἀποδεξαμένῳ τὰ Λείψανα τῶν Ἁγίων· εἰ δὲ οὐκ
ἔστι τοιοῦτος Ναός, πᾶσα ἡ Ἀκολουθία γίνεται ἐν τῷ νέῳ Ναῷ
, ὡς ἡ καθωρισμένη τάξις.
   Τὸ πρωῒ ψάλλεται ὁ Ὄρθρος, κατὰ τὴν τυπικὴν τῆς
τυχούσης ἡμέρας διάταξιν (ὅρα τὰς διατάξεις § α΄-ς΄). Μετὰ δὲ
τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Αἰνεῖτε, κατέρχεται ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἀπὸ τοῦ
θρόνου εἰς τὸ μέσον τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ κλίνας τὰ γόνατα, βλέπων πρὸς
Ἀνατολὰς ἀναγινώσκει τὰς δύο προκαταρκτικὰς εὐχὰς τῶν

----------------------------------------
1. Εἰ καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἀρχαίαν τάξιν ἐν περιπτώσει Ἐγκαινίων Ναοῦ ὀφείλει γίνεσθαι
Ἀγρυπνία, ἀλλὰ ταύτην ψάλλεται ὁ Ἑσπερινὸς μόνος, τῇ συνήθει ὥρᾳ, τὸ δὲ πρωῒ ὁ
Ὄρθρος, μεθ’ ὃν τελοῦνται τὰ Ἐγκαίνια καὶ ἀκολούθως ἡ Λειτουργία.

*(Printed Page 866)*

=== LEAF p882 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of Church Consecration Concluded and The Ceremony of Consecration (p. 867)]

867

and those of the Feast. The Resurrection Canon, that of the Feast and that
of the Consecration. The Resurrection Exapostilarion, that of the Feast, that
of the Saint of the Church and that of the Consecration. At the Praises: 3
Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Feast and 2 of the Saint of the Church.
Glory of the Feast, Now and ever of the Consecration. Great Doxology and
"Today salvation."
   The Apostolos and Gospel readings for each of the above situations
are decided by the Head Celebrant [presiding Bishop] appropriately for the
particular feast at hand.

THE CEREMONY OF THE CONSE-
CRATION

   The [presiding] Bishop must have prepared all the different things,
as listed in the Great Efchologion, that are required for the dedication and
Consecration prepared in advance. The evening before, the Bishop goes
with the clergy to the new church and, before Vespers, he makes ready the
holy Relics, in three portions, on the Holy Table. When the Holy Relics have
been placed on a Paten [a small round tray] and covered with a Veil over the
star [a cross-like structure holding up the Veil], the Bishop intones "Blessed
is our God." This is followed by the Trisagion Prayers, and the following
Troparia are chanted: "Your Martyrs, O Lord," "Champions of the Lord,"
"[Let us all implore] Christ's Martyrs," and the Troparion of the day. Then,
"As first fruits of nature," Glory, "Godlike choir of Martyrs," Now and
ever, "Theotokos, you are the true vine, together with the Champions" and
the Dismissal. If there is another consecrated Church nearby, the Bishop
transfers the Relics to it before Vespers and places them on the Holy Table,
where a candle burns through the whole night. Vespers and the All-night
Vigil1 are chanted in the Church that has received the Relics of the Saints.
If, however, there is no nearby consecrated Church, the whole Office takes
place in the new Church, in accordance with the prescribed order.
   In the morning, Matins is chanted according to the order of service
of the occuring day (see the details above in Situations 1 - 6). After the "Let
everything that has breath" and "Praise the Lord," the Bishop comes

----------------------------------------
1. Even though according to the ancient order on the occasion of the Consecration of a Church,
an all-night Vigil was prescribed, currently only Vespers is chanted at its prescribed hour, in the
morning the Matins, after which are celebrated the Consecration and then the Liturgy.

*(Printed Page 867)*

=== LEAF p883 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Ceremony of the Consecration: Vesting, Wax-Mastic, and Procession (p. 868)]

868

Ἐγκαινίων Καλλίστου τοῦ ἁγιωτάτου Πατριάρχου, τὰς πρὸ τῆς
Ἀκολουθίας τῶν Ἐγκαινίων ἐν τῷ Εὐχολογίῳ κειμένας, εἶτα
ἐγειρόμενος προσκυνεῖ τὰς ἁγίας Εἰκόνας καὶ προετοιμάζεται ὡς
συνήθως διὰ τὴν Λειτουργίαν, ψαλλομένου τοῦ Τὸν δεσπότην καὶ
Ἀρχιερέα, μεθ’ ὃ ψάλλονται τὰ Στιχηρὰ τῶν Αἴνων, τὸ
Δοξαστικόν, ἡ Δοξολογία, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου καὶ ἡ
Ἀπόλυσις.
   Εἶτα τὰ τῆς Κηρομαστίχης εἴδη τῇ χύτρᾳ ἐγχέονται καὶ
τίθεται αὕτη ἐπὶ τοῦ πυρός, μετὰ δὲ τὸ διαλυθῆναι αὐτά, πλησίον
πάλιν τὴν χύτραν κατέχουσι τοῦ πυρὸς ἵνα μὴ ἀποψυχρανθῶσι τὰ
ἐν αὐτῇ· ὡσαύτως καὶ ἑτέρα χύτρα πληροῦται ὕδατος καὶ
παρατίθεται τῷ πυρί, ὅπως θερμανθῇ, εἰς ἔκπλυσιν τῆς ἁγίας
Τραπέζης· εἶτα περιδεσμοῦνται τὰ χαρτία εἰς τὸ χεῖλος τοῦ
Κίονος,1* ὥστε ἐξέχειν αὐτὰ ἐπάνω τοῦ χείλους δακτύλους δύο, καὶ
ἀναγεμίζεται ἔσωθεν ὁ γῦρος τῶν χαρτίων μὲ τετριμμένον
μάρμαρον ἵνα μὴ ῥεύσῃ ἡ Κηρομαστίχη.
   Καὶ πάντων τῶν ἄλλων χρησίμων προετοιμασθέντων, ὁ
Ἀρχιερεὺς ποιεῖ Εὐλογητόν, καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Κύριε εἰσάκουσον
τῆς προσευχῆς μου, εἶτα Συναπτὴ μικρὰ παρὰ τοῦ Διακόνου Ἔτι
καὶ ἔτι, καὶ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἐκφωνεῖ Ὅτι Ἅγιος εἶ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν,
ὁ Διάκονος Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς τὴν Εὐχήν, εἶτα
Εἰρήνη πᾶσι, ὁ Διάκονος Τὰς κεφαλὰς ἡμῶν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς τὴν
Εὐχὴν μυστικῶς καὶ τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Εἴη τὸ κράτος.2
   Καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἐκφώνησιν, [ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς] αἴρει τὰ ἅγια
Λείψανα ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς μετὰ ἁγίου Δίσκου, προπορευομένων τῶν
Ἱερέων μετὰ Εὐαγγελίων, Σταυροῦ τε καὶ Ἑξαπτερύγων καὶ
Λαμπάδων, τῶν δὲ Ψαλτῶν ψαλλόντων τὰ Τροπάρια Ἅγιοι
Μάρτυρες, Δόξα σοι Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, ἐξέρχεται τοῦ Ναοῦ (ὡς
καὶ ἅπας ὁ λαός) καὶ λιτανεύει περὶ αὐτὸν κύκλῳ, ψαλλομένων τῶν
Ἰδιομέλων Ἐγκαινίζου, ἐγκαινίζου· Πάλαι μὲν ἐγκαινίζων·

----------------------------------------
[*] 1. Ὁ κεντρικὸς στῦλος ὑποστηρίζων τὴν Ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν, ἐφ' ᾧ τοποθετοῦνται τὰ ἱερὰ
Λείψανα. Ὑπάρχουσι ἐπίσης καὶ ἕτεροι 4 κίονες ὑποστηρίζοντες ἑκάστην γωνίαν τῆς Ἁγίας
Τραπέζης, συμβολίζοντες τοὺς 4 Εὐαγγελιστὰς ἐνῷ ὁ κεντρικὸς κίων συμβολίζει τὸν Χριστόν.
2. Ἂν μὴ τελῆται ἡ Ἀκολουθία εἰς τὸν νέον Ναόν, ἀλλ’ εἰς ἕτερον ἐγκαινιασμένον, ταύτῃ τῇ
ὥρᾳ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἐνδεδυμένος τὴν ἀρχιερατικὴν αὐτοῦ στολὴν ὡς καὶ ἅπαντες οἱ Ἱερεῖς, αἴρει
ἐπὶ κεφαλῆς τὰ ἅγια Λείψανα καὶ μεταφέρει αὐτὰ εἰς τὸν νέον Ναὸν μετὰ παρατάξεως, ὅπου
μετὰ τὴν συνήθη περὶ τὸν νέον Ναὸν Λιτανείαν εἰσέρχεται ἐν αὐτῷ ἐκτελέσων τὰ Ἐγκαίνια
καὶ ἀκολούθως τὴν Λειτουργίαν, διατάττει δὲ ἵνα τελεσθῇ ἡ Λειτουργία καὶ τῷ Ναῷ ἐκείνῳ.

*(Printed Page 868)*

=== LEAF p884 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Ceremony of the Consecration: Vesting, Wax-Mastic, and Procession (p. 869)]

869

down from his throne into the middle of the church and, having knelt down
facing East, he reads the two preparatory prayers of the Consecration by the
most holy Patriarch Kallistos, which are found in the Efchologion. He then
rises and venerates the holy Icons and prepares as usual for the Liturgy while
"Our Master and High Priest" is chanted, followed by the Stichira of the
Praises, the Doxastikon, the Doxology, the Apolytikion of Matins and the
Dismissal.
   Then the various materials of the wax-mastic are poured into a
vessel [boiling pot] which is then placed on the fire. When they have melted,
the vessel is kept close to the fire so that what it contains does not get cold
and become solidified. Likewise, other vessels are filled with water and put
on the fire, so that they are heated for the washing of the Holy Table. Papers
are then tied around the lips of the Column,[*] so that they extend about an
inch above the lip. The ring of papers is filled inside with crushed marble,
so that the wax-mastic does not run over the edge.
   When everything else needed is ready, the Bishop gives the
blessing "Blessed is our God" and at once Psalm 142 is chanted,
followed by the Small Litany by the Deacon. The Bishop then
exclaims "For You, our God are holy." Then the Deacon: "Let us
pray to the Lord"; then the Bishop recites the Prayer and intones
"Peace to all." The Deacon : "Let us bow our heads," the Prayer
by the Bishop in a low voice and the Exclamation "May His kingdom
be." 2
   After this exclamation, the Bishop lifts the Paten on which are the
Holy Relics onto his head and, preceded by the Priests with the Gospels, the
Cross, the Exapteryga [six-winged fans] and the Candles, with the Chanters
chanting the Troparia "Holy Martyrs," and "Glory to You, Christ God," he
leaves the church (as do all the people) and goes in procession around it,
while the Idiomela "Be renewed, be renewed," "Of old when renewing,"

----------------------------------------
[*] [The central column supporting the Holy Table, in which the Holy Relics are placed. There are also
4 more columns supporting the Holy Table at each corner. They symbolize the Four Evangelists, while
the central supporting column symbolizes Christ.]
2. If the Service is not conducted in the new Church, but in another already consecrated Church, at this
time the Bishop vested in his Archieratical vestments (as well as all the Clergy in their vestments) carries
upon his head the Holy Relics and transfers them in a procession to the new Church, where after the
customary circling of the new Church, he enters it to celebrate the Consecration and following that the
Liturgy; it is prescribed that the Liturgy be celebrated in that [the new] Church.

*(Printed Page 869)*

=== LEAF p885 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Ceremony of the Consecration: Triple Procession, Entrance Rites, and Deposition of Relics (p. 870)]

870

Ἐγκαινία τιμᾶσθαι· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ἐπὶ τῶν κόλπων τῶν
πατρικῶν. Φθάσας δὲ ἔμπροσθεν τῶν μεγάλων πυλῶν τοῦ Ναοῦ,
τίθησι τὰ ἱερὰ Λείψανα ἐπὶ τετραποδίου, καὶ ὁ μὲν Διάκονος
ἀναγινώσκει τὸν Ἀπόστολον, ὁ δὲ Ἀρχιερεὺς τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· μετὰ
τοῦτο αὖθις λιτανεύει περὶ τὸν Ναὸν ψαλλομένης τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ
Κανόνος τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, καὶ ἀφοῦ φθάσῃ αὖθις πρὸ τῶν Πυλῶν,
ἀναγινώσκεται Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον ὡς ἀνωτέρω· καὶ τρίτον
λιτανεύει περὶ τὸν Ναὸν ψαλλομένης τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος·
ἐλθὼν δὲ τελευταῖον πρὸ τῶν Πυλῶν τοῦ Ναοῦ ἐκφωνεῖ Εὐλογητὸς
εἶ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, Ἀμήν,
καὶ ψάλλεται τὸ Τροπάριον Ὁ ἐν τῇ πέτρᾳ τῆς πίστεως· τούτου
ψαλλομένου, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς τίθησι τὰ ἱερὰ Λείψανα ἐπὶ τοῦ
Τετραποδίου καὶ ἐπεύχεται τὴν Εὐχὴν Ὁ Θεὸς καὶ Πατήρ, εἶτα
καὶ τὴν τῆς Εἰσόδου Εὐχήν.
   Τῶν δὲ Πυλῶν τοῦ Ναοῦ κεκλεισμένων οὐσῶν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς
ἐκφωνεῖ, Ἄρατε πύλας οἱ ἄρχοντες ἡμῶν καὶ ἐπάρθητε πύλαι
αἰώνιοι, καὶ εἰσελεύσεται ὁ Βασιλεὺς τῆς δόξης· ἔνδοθεν
δὲ τοῦ Ναοῦ ἱστάμενός τις ἀντιφωνεῖ Τίς ἐστιν οὗτος ὁ
Βασιλεὺς τῆς δόξης; ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς Κύριος κραταιὸς καὶ
δυνατός, Κύριος δυνατὸς ἐν πολέμῳ· καὶ ταῦτα λέγονται ἐκ
τρίτου. Μετὰ ταῦτα σφραγίσας τρὶς τὰς πύλας μετὰ τῶν ἱερῶν
Λειψάνων σταυροειδῶς, καὶ τούτων ἀνοιγομένων, εἰσέρχεται ἐν
τῷ Ναῷ μετὰ τοῦ Κλήρου καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς πᾶς ὁ λαός, ψαλλομένου
τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου τῶν Ἐγκαινίων Ὡς τοῦ ἄνω στερεώματος τὴν
εὐπρέπειαν.
   Εἰσελθὼν δὲ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν Βῆμα ἀποτίθησι τὰ
ἅγια Λείψανα εἰς τὴν ἡτοιμασμένην αὐτοῖς ἀργυρᾶν θήκην, καὶ
ἐπιχύσας τούτοις ἅγιον Μύρον, ἀσφαλίζει ταῦτα μετ’ ἐπιμελείας
καὶ προσοχῆς μεγίστης, ἐκφωνῶν ἐκ γ΄ τὸ Αἰωνία ἡ μνήμη τῶν
κτιτόρων τοῦ ἁγίου Ναοῦ τούτου, τοῦ λαοῦ ἀντιφωνοῦντος
Αἰωνία ἡ μνήμη.
   Καὶ ἀκολούθως [ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς] ἐπισυνάπτει τὰς δύο Εὐχάς, καὶ
μετὰ τὸ Ἀμὴν εἰσφέρουσιν αὐτῷ θερμὴν τὴν Κηρομαστίχην, ἣν
ἐκχέει ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ φυτοῦ καὶ συνεφαρμόζει τὰ χαρτία· εἶτα
ἐπιλαβόντες οἱ παρατυχόντες τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης, τιθέασι ταύτην
ἐπὶ τοῦ Κίονος, καὶ τούτων γιγνομένων οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσιν εἰς ἦχον
β΄ τὸν 144 Ψαλμὸν Ὑψώσω σε ὁ Θεός μου, καὶ ξενομένης τῆς

*(Printed Page 870)*

=== LEAF p886 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Ceremony of the Consecration: Triple Procession, Entrance Rites, and Deposition of Relics (p. 871)]

871

"For Consecration is to be honored," Glory, Now and ever, "He who rests
on the parental breast" are chanted. When the Bishop has arrived in front
of the main doors of the Church, he puts the Holy Relics on a four-legged
table; the Deacon reads the Apostolos, then the Bishop reads the Gospel.
After this, the Bishop goes again in procession around the Church, while the
3rd Ode of the Canon of the Consecration is chanted. When he has again
reached the main doors, the Apostolos and Gospel are read as described
above. He goes in procession for a third time around the Church, while the
6th Ode of the Canon is chanted. When he comes to the main doors for the
final time, he exclaims "Blessed are You, Christ our God, to the ages of
ages. Amen," and the Troparion "You Who on the rock of faith" is sung.
As this is sung, the Bishop puts the Holy Relics on the four-legged table [in
front of the main doors] and says the Prayer "God and Father," followed
by the Prayer of the Entrance.
   With the doors of the Church shut, the Bishop exclaims "Lift up
your gates, you rulers; and be lifted up, you eternal gates, and the King
of glory will enter." From inside the Church, some one standing there asks
in a challenging manner "Who is this King of glory?" The Bishop replies
"The Lord mighty and powerful, the Lord powerful in war." The foregoing
questions and answers are repeated three times. After this, the Bishop
[raises the Paten with the Holy Relics on it] and with them makes the sign
of the Cross on the doors three times. When the doors have been opened,
the Bishop enters the Church with the Clergy and all the people with them,
while the Apolytikion of the Consecration "As the splendor of the firma-
ment above" is chanted.
   Having entered the Sanctuary, the Bishop places the Holy Relics in
the silver case that has been prepared for them and, when he has poured Holy
Myron [Myrrh] on them, he makes them secure with the greatest care and
attention, while exclaiming three times "Eternal be the memory of the
Founders of this holy House." The people respond with "Eternal be the
memory."
   Note: For the sake of greater clarity, the following paragraph is a
free translation of Violakis' original text, adding also some information
mainly of the Mega Efchologion, pp. 291-325.
   Then, the Bishop adds the two Prayers "Lord, our God" and "Lord
God, our Savior." After the final "Amen," the Bishop places the silver case
containing the Holy Relics into the opening in the middle of the central
Column, the "plant" [wherein some of the faithful have put slips of paper
with the names of their departed ones]. In order to seal the Holy Relics

*(Printed Page 871)*

=== LEAF p887 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Ceremony of the Consecration: Savvanon Vesting, Prayers, and Washing of the Holy Table (p. 872)]

872

ἀπορρευσάσης Κηρομαστίχης, καθαιρομένου τε τοῦ τόπου ἐφ’ οὗ
ἔρρευσε, ψάλλεται ὁ 22 Ψαλμὸς Κύριος ποιμαίνει με.
   Εἶτα ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἐκφωνεῖ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, καὶ εὐθὺς
φέρεται τὸ σάββανον καὶ περιτίθεται ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀρχιερέα ἐπάνω τῶν
ἀρχιερατικῶν αὐτοῦ ἀμφίων ἔμπροσθεν καὶ ὄπισθεν ἐπὶ τῷ μὴ
φαίνεσθαι τὰ ἀρχιερατικὰ αὐτοῦ ἄμφια καὶ δεσμοῦνται μετὰ ζώνης,
περιτυλίσσονται δὲ καὶ οἱ δύο αὐτοῦ βραχίονες μετὰ δύο καινῶν
μανδηλίων δεσμουμένων καὶ αὐτῶν ὑπὸ ζώνης, καὶ οὕτω περιβληθέντος
τοῦ Ἀρχιερέως, τίθεται ἐπεύχιον ἔμπροσθεν τῶν ἁγίων Θυρῶν, καὶ
τοῦ Διακόνου εἰπόντος Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι κλίναντες τὰ γόνατα, τοῦ
Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς κλίνας τὰ γόνατα λέγει τὴν Εὐχὴν
Ὁ Θεὸς ὁ ἄναρχος, εἶτα ὁ Διάκονος Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον,
ἐλέησον, ἀνάστησον καὶ διαφύλαξον ἡμᾶς, ἐπισυνάπτων καὶ
τὴν μεγάλην Συναπτὴν Ἐν εἰρήνῃ τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Μετὰ
τὴν ἐκφώνησιν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἔρχεται ἔμπροσθεν τῆς ἁγίας
Τραπέζης, καὶ λαβὼν τὰ Νίτρα (ἢ μοσχοσάπωνα) σφραγίζει ταῦτα
ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν μερῶν καὶ ῥίπτει αὐτὰ σταυροειδῶς ἐπὶ τῆς
ἁγίας Τραπέζης, εἶτα φέρεται χλιαρὸν ὕδωρ, καὶ τοῦ Διακόνου
εἰπόντος Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς κλίνας τὴν
κεφαλήν, ἐπεύχεται τὸ ὕδωρ μυστικῶς, καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἐκφώνησιν
ἐπιχέει αὐτὸ ἐπὶ τῆς Τραπέζης, λέγων Εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ Πατρὸς
καὶ τοῦ Υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος, Ἀμήν, καὶ διὰ τοῦ
ἐκχυθέντος ὕδατος καὶ τῶν Νίτρων ἐκπλύνει τὴν ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν καὶ
σπογγίζει αὐτὴν μετὰ καινῶν σπόγγων, τὸν δὲ Κίονα, ὡς μὴ
δυνάμενος ταῖς χερσὶν ἐκπλῦναι, ἐκπλύνει καὶ σπογγίζει αὐτὸν μετὰ
τοῦ σπόγγου· τούτων γιγνομένων, ψάλλεται ὁ 83 Ψαλμὸς Ὡς
ἀγαπητὰ τὰ σκηνώματά σου, Κύριε· μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἀπόπλυσιν καὶ
ἀποσπόγγισιν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἐκφωνεῖ Δόξα τῷ Θεῷ ἡμῶν εἰς
τοὺς αἰῶνας.

*(Printed Page 872)*

=== LEAF p888 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Ceremony of the Consecration: Savvanon Vesting, Prayers, and Washing of the Holy Table (p. 873)]

873

permanently, the Bishop pours into the opening the hot wax-mastic brought
to him and rearranges the papers around the rim of the opening. Then, those
assisting the Bishop put a plate or slab on top of the opening, covering the
entire Holy Table or merely the opening. While the placement and sealing
of the Holy Relics in the central Column is being done, the Choirs chant
Psalm 144 "I will exalt You, my God" in Mode II. While the wax-mastic
that may have been spilled is being scraped up and the place on which it ran
is being cleaned, Psalm 22 "The Lord is my shepherd" is chanted.
   Then, the Bishop exclaims "Blessed is our God" and at once the
Savvanon, a thin white sheet-like garment, is brought to him. The Bishop
is dressed in it over his hieratical vestments and tied with a belt, both in front
and behind, so that the vestments are not visible, and his two arms are
wrapped in two new cloths, which are also tied with a belt. When the Bishop
has been so dressed, a prayer mat [or pillow] is placed in front of the Holy
Gates and, when the Deacon has said "Again and again on bended knees
let us pray to the Lord," the Bishop kneels and says the Prayer "God without
beginning." Then the Deacon says "Help us, save us, have mercy on us,
raise us up and keep us," to which he adds the Great Litany "In peace let
us pray to the Lord." After the Exclamation [of this Litany], the Bishop goes
in front of the Holy Table and takes the pieces of scented soap and, having
made the sign of the Cross on them on both sides, puts them on the Holy
Table in the form of a Cross. Then, lukewarm water is brought, and, when
the Deacon has said "Let us pray to the Lord," the Bishop bows his head and
prays in a low voice over the water. After the Exclamation, he pours the
water over the Holy Table saying "In the name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Spirit, Amen." With the water that has been poured and the
pieces of soap he washes the Holy Table and sponges it with new sponges.
Since he cannot wash the Column with his hands, he washes and dries it with
the sponge. While this is going on, Psalm 83 "How lovely Your dwelling,
Lord" is chanted. After the washing and the sponging, the Bishop exclaims
"Glory to our God unto the ages."

*(Printed Page 873)*

=== LEAF p889 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Ceremony of the Consecration: Rosewater, Holy Myron, Evangelists, Katasarkion, and Antimensia (p. 874)]

874

   Καὶ λαβὼν Βικίον (Κανίον) ῥοδοστάγμου ἐπιχύσας [ὁ
Ἀρχιερεὺς] πλύνει τὴν ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν καὶ σπογγίζει μετὰ τῶν
Ἀντιμηνσίων,[*] καὶ τούτων γιγνομένων ψάλλεται εἰς ἦχον βαρὺν
τὸ Ῥαντιεῖς με ὑσσώπῳ καὶ καθαρισθήσομαι, πλυνεῖς με καὶ
ὑπὲρ χιόνα λευκανθήσομαι, εἶτα αὖθις δοξάζει λέγων Εὐλογητὸς
ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν πάντοτε νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν
αἰώνων, καὶ λαβὼν τὸ δοχεῖον τοῦ ἁγίου Μύρου, τοῦ Διακόνου
λέγοντος Πρόσχωμεν, ἐπιχέει Μύρον τῇ ἁγίᾳ Τραπέζῃ, ψάλλων
τρὶς τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ Βαπτίσματος, καὶ δι’ αὐτοῦ
ποιεῖ Σταυροὺς τρεῖς, μέσον ἕνα καὶ δύο ἑκατέρωθεν, καὶ ἀλείφει
τῇ χειρὶ διὰ τῶν τριῶν ἐκείνων Σταυρῶν πᾶσαν τὴν ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν
σπογγίζων αὐτὴν δι’ Ἀντιμηνσίων· τὸ αὐτὸ ποιεῖ καὶ εἰς τὸν Κίονα
τῆς Τραπέζης· τούτων τελουμένων, ψάλλεται ὁ 132 Ψαλμὸς Ἰδοὺ
δὴ τί καλόν, ἢ τί τερπνόν, καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα αὖθις ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς
ἐκφωνεῖ Δόξα τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ τῷ ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι,
νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, καὶ τὸ Δόξα
σοι, ἁγία Τριὰς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, δόξα σοι εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας
τῶν αἰώνων· εἶτα ἐφαρμόζει ἐπὶ τῶν τεσσάρων γωνιῶν τῆς
Τραπέζης τὰ τέσσαρα ὑφάσματα ἀπεικονισμένους ἔχοντα τοὺς
τέσσαρας Εὐαγγελιστάς, ἢ μόνα τὰ ὀνόματα αὐτῶν, προσκολλῶν
αὐτὰ διὰ Κηρομαστίχης.
   Ἀκολούθως ἐφαπλοῖ τὸ λεγόμενον κατασάρκιον ἐπὶ τῆς
ἁγίας Τραπέζης, οὗ οἱ σχοῖνοι δεσμοῦνται σταυροειδῶς ὑποκάτωθεν
αὐτῆς ἐπὶ τοῦ Κίονος· τούτων τελουμένων, ψάλλεται ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων
τῶν Χορῶν ὁ 131 Ψαλμὸς Μνήσθητι Κύριε τοῦ Δαβίδ· μετὰ τοῦτο
αὖθις ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἐκφωνεῖ Δόξα τῷ Θεῷ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας,
Ἀμήν, καὶ νύπτει τὰς χεῖρας ἔν τινι ἀγγείῳ καινῷ ἢ ἐν τῷ
χωνευτηρίῳ, ὥστε μηδόλως ἐκχυθῆναι ἔξω οὐδὲ ῥανίδα μίαν, καὶ
σπογγισάμενος τὰς χεῖρας μανδηλίῳ καινῷ λαμβάνει τὸν ἐπενδύτην
τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης (ἤτοι τὸ ἐφάπλωμα) καὶ ἐφαπλοῖ αὐτὸν ἐπ’
αὐτῆς, ὅτε ψάλλεται ὁ 92 Ψαλμὸς Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν· καὶ
αὖθις ἐκφωνεῖ Δόξα σοι, ἁγία Τριὰς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, εἰς τοὺς
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, Ἀμήν· μετὰ τὸ Ἀμὴν ἐφαπλοῖ ἐπὶ τῆς
ἁγίας Τραπέζης τὰ ἐγκαινιασθέντα Ἀντιμήνσια θάτερον θατέρῳ
ἐπιτιθέμενος καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτοῖς τὸ τῆς Ἐκκλησίας, ἐπὶ τούτου δὲ τὸ

----------------------------------------
[*] [Ἀντιμήνσιον· Τεμάχιον ὑφάσματος ἔχον ἀπεικονισμένην τὴν Ταφὴν τοῦ Κυρίου, ὃ
ἁπλώνεται ἐπὶ τῆς Ἁγίας Τραπέζης πρὶν ἀρχίσῃ ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Πιστῶν. Χωρὶς αὐτὸ δὲν δύναται
νὰ τελεσθῇ ἡ Θ. Λειτουργία. Εἰς τὴν παροῦσαν περίπτωσιν, τὰ ἀντιμήνσια μὲ τὰ ὁποῖα ὁ
Ἀρχιερεὺς σπογγίζει τὴν νέαν Ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν ἐξαγιάζονται καὶ οὕτως χρησιμοποιοῦνται ὡς
Ἀντιμήνσια ἑτέρων νέων Ἁγίων Τραπεζῶν.]

*(Printed Page 874)*

=== LEAF p890 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Ceremony of the Consecration: Rosewater, Holy Myron, Evangelists, Katasarkion, and Antimensia (p. 875)]

875

Then, having taken a wine-jar [container] of rose-water, he [the
Bishop] pours it on and washes the Holy Table and sponges it with the
Antiminsia.[**] While this is being done, there is chanted in Mode Varys
"You will sprinkle me with hyssop and I shall be cleansed; You will wash
me, and I shall be made whiter than snow." Then the Bishop again gives
glory, saying "Blessed is our God, always now and for ever, and to the ages
of ages." Having taken the vessel of Holy Myron [Myrrh], when the Deacon
has said "Let us attend," the Bishop pours it onto the Holy Table, chanting
three times, as at a Baptism, "Alleluia!" and makes three Crosses with it, one
in the middle and two on either side. With his hand he anoints the entire Holy
Table with these three Crosses, sponging it with the Antiminsia. He does the
same to the [central] Column of the Table. While this is being done, Psalm
132 "Behold, how good and pleasant it is" is chanted, after which the
Bishop again exclaims "Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Spirit. And now and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen"; and "Glory
to You, Holy Trinity, our God, glory to You unto the ages of ages. Amen."
Then he arranges on the four corners of the Table the four pieces of cloth
which have imprinted on them the icons of the four Evangelists, or simply
their names, gluing them with wax-mastic.
   After this the Bishop unfolds the Katasarkion [a thin cloth placed
on the bare surface, "the skin"] on the Holy Table and its strings are tied in
the form of a Cross underneath the Holy Table onto the Column. While all
this is being done, Psalm 131 "O Lord, remember David" is chanted, after
which the Bishop exclaims again "Glory to God unto the ages. Amen."
Then he washes his hands in a new vessel, or in the sacrarium, so that not
one single drop may fall outside it, [but the liquid should drain through a sink
into the natural soil in the ground only]. He wipes his hands with a new
towel; then he takes a cloth cover and spreads it over the Holy Table, while
Psalm 92 "The Lord has reigned" is chanted. He then exclaims again
"Glory to You, Holy Trinity, our God, unto the ages of ages. Amen."
After the "Amen," he unfolds the consecrated Antiminsia on the Holy Table
one on top of the other and, on them, the Antiminsion of the new Church and,

----------------------------------------
[**] [Antiminsion, pl. Antiminsia: An imprinted cloth depicting the Burial of Our Lord. It is
unfolded before the beginning of the Liturgy of the Faithful. Without it, no Liturgy may be
celebrated. In this instance, the Bishop sponges the Holy Table with several Antiminsia, thus
consecrating them also and making them available for liturgical purposes for the Holy Tables of
other new churches.]

*(Printed Page 875)*
