=== LEAF p871 ===
[Original Greek Text: Service of the Holy Passion Concluded (Gospels 7–11, Canon, and Praises) (p. 856)]

856

τροπάριον Διὰ ξύλου ὁ Ἀδάμ, καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ μετὰ τῶν ὑπολοίπων
Μακαρισμῶν· μετὰ δὲ τὸ Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν Μητέρα σου Χριστέ,
ψάλλεται τὸ Προκείμενον Διεμερίσαντο τὰ ἱμάτιά μου
ἑαυτοῖς ἐκ γ΄ μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Ζ΄
Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἶτα ὁ Πατριάρχης τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν χῦμα, καὶ
ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Η΄ Εὐαγγέλιον. Μετὰ τοῦτο ἄρχεται ὁ α΄ Χορὸς
ψάλλειν τὸν Κανόνα Πρὸς σὲ ὀρθρίζω τὸν δι’ εὐσπλαγχνίαν
ἀνὰ δ΄ τροπάρια μετὰ τοῦ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ
, καὶ τὸν Εἱρμὸν ἐπαναλαμβανόμενον εἰς τὸ τέλος· μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν
ἡ Αἴτησις, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ
Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Μ. Παρασκευῆς. Μετὰ ταῦτα
ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ Χορὸς τὴν η΄ Ὠδήν, μετὰ δὲ τὸν Εἱρμὸν ὁ Διάκονος
ἐκφωνεῖ Τὴν Θεοτόκον καὶ μητέρα τοῦ Φωτός, καὶ ὁ
Πατριάρχης ἄρχεται ψάλλειν τὴν θ΄ Ὠδὴν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν τῶν
Χερουβίμ, μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν ἡ Αἴτησις, καὶ ἀκολούθως ψάλλει τὸ
Ἐξαποστειλάριον Τὸν λῃστὴν αὐθημερόν, ὅπερ ψάλλεται ἐκ γ΄·
ψαλλομένου τοῦ Ἐξαποστειλαρίου ἔρχεται ὁ Πριμικήριος καὶ
ἵσταται ἐν τῷ ὡρισμένῳ τόπῳ, ὡς εἴθισται· μετὰ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον
ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Θ΄ Εὐαγγέλιον, μετ’ αὐτὸ δὲ ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει
τὸ Πᾶσα πνοή. Εἰς τὸ Αἰνεῖτε ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται τοῦ
θρόνου καὶ προσκυνεῖ τὸν Ἐσταυρωμένον καὶ εὐλογήσας τὸν λαόν,
τοῦ α΄ Χοροῦ ψάλλοντος τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη, ἀνέρχεται αὖθις καὶ
ἵσταται εἰς τὸν θρόνον, οἱ δὲ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι τὰ δ΄ τῶν Αἴνων
Ἰδιόμελα· μετὰ τὸ Καὶ νῦν, Τὸν νῶτόν μου ἔδωκα εἰς
μαστίγωσιν ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Ι΄ Εὐαγγέλιον, εἶτα ὁ Πατριάρχης
τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει, Κύριε, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν χῦμα, καὶ μετὰ τὸ
τέλος ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτης τὸ Πληρώσωμεν τὴν Ἑωθινὴν
δέησιν ἡμῶν τῷ Κυρίῳ κτλ. καὶ μετὰ τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Σὸν γὰρ
ἐστὶ τὸ ἐλεεῖν καὶ σῴζειν ἡμᾶς ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ ΙΑ΄
Εὐαγγέλιον· εἶτα ἄρχονται ψάλλεσθαι τὰ Ἀπόστιχα ἀπὸ τοῦ β΄
Χοροῦ, ὁ δὲ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος μεταξὺ τούτου ποιήσας τῷ Πατριάρχῃ
σχῆμα εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Ἱερὸν καὶ ἐνδύεται τὴν στολὴν αὐτοῦ ὅπως
ἀναγνώσῃ τὸ τελευταῖον Εὐαγγέλιον. Ψαλλομένου τοῦ Καὶ νῦν,
Ἤδη βάπτεται κάλαμος ὑπὸ τοῦ α΄ Χοροῦ, ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος
ἐξέρχεται μετὰ τοῦ ἱεροῦ Εὐαγγελίου καὶ ἔρχεται πρὸς τὸν
Πατριάρχην καὶ κύψας λέγει Εὐλόγησον Δέσποτα τὸν
Εὐαγγελιστήν, ὁ Πατριάρχης ἐπιθεὶς τὴν χεῖρα, λέγει Ὁ Θεὸς
διὰ πρεσβειῶν τοῦ ἁγίου ἐνδόξου Ἀποστόλου κτλ., ὁ δὲ
ἐπειπὼν τρὶς τὸ Ἀμήν, εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Ἱερόν, καὶ ἐξελθὼν διὰ

*(Printed Page 856)*

=== LEAF p872 ===
[English Facing Translation: Service of the Holy Passion Concluded (Gospels 7–11, Canon, and Praises) (p. 857)]

857

Sixth Gospel [Mark 15:16-32] is read. After the foregoing, the First Choir
begins chanting the Beatitudes “In Your Kingdom remember us, O Lord.”
The Second Choir, after chanting the Beatitude “Blessed are they who
hunger and thirst after righteousness,” sings immediately after it the
Troparion “Because of a tree, Adam was estranged from Paradise” and the
rest of the Troparia with the remaining Beatitudes. After Now and ever,
“Your Mother, O Christ,” we sing the Prokimenon “They divided my
garments among them” (3 times) with its verses, and the Seventh Gospel
[Matthew 27: 33-54] is read. The Patriarch then recites Psalm 50, and the
Eighth Gospel [Luke 23: 32-49] is read. After this, the First Choir begins
to chant the Canon “I come early in the morning before You, Who through
compassion” with four Troparia at each Ode with the Verse “Glory to You,
Our God”; the Irmos is repeated at the end of each Ode. After the Irmos,
the Small Litany is intoned, and, after the Exclamation, we recite the
Kontakion, Ikos, the Minologion, and the Postscript of Great Friday. After
the foregoing, the Second Choir begins chanting the Eighth Ode [of the
Canon]. After the Irmos of this Ode, the Deacon exclaims “The Theotokos
and the Mother of the Light.” The Patriarch begins to chant the Ninth Ode
“More honorable than the Cherubim.” After the Irmos [of the Ninth Ode],
the Small Litany is intoned, and, following that, the Exapostilarion “The
thief on the same day” is sung three times. While the Exapostilarion is being
sung, the Primikirios comes and stands in his designated place, as is
customary. After the Exapostilarion, the Ninth Gospel [John 19:25-37] is
read. After this, the First Choir sings “Let eveerything that has breath.” At
“Praise [Him all His angels],” the Patriarch comes down from his throne
and venerates with a bow the Crucified Christ. He blesses the people while
the First Choir chants “For many years, [Master].” He ascends again and
stands on his Throne, and the Choirs chant the 4 Idiomela of the Praises.
After the Now and ever, “I gave my back to whipping,” the 10th Gospel
[Mark 15: 43-47] is read. The Patriarch then recites the Small Doxology “To
You belongs all glory, Lord, our God,” and at the end the Great Archimandrite
chants “Let us complete our morning supplication to the Lord.” After the
Exclamation “Yours it is to have mercy on us and to save us,” the 11th
Gospel [John 19:38-42] is read. Then the Second Choir begins to sing the
Aposticha. In the meantime, the Great Archdeacon, having made a sign to
the Patriarch, enters the Holy Sanctuary and puts on his vestment in order
to read the last Gospel. As the First Choir sings Now and ever, “Already
the reed has been painted,” the Great Archdeacon exits the Holy
Sanctuary with the Holy Gospel and comes before the Patriarch. Bowing his

*(Printed Page 857)*

=== LEAF p873 ===
[Original Greek Text: Service of the Holy Passion Concluded (Gospel 12, Dismissal, and Departure) (p. 858)]

858

τῆς Βορείου πύλης ἀνέρχεται εἰς τὸν Ἄμβωνα. Μετὰ τὸ τέλος
τοῦ Ἰδιομέλου, ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτης ἱστάμενος εἰς τὴν Ὡραίαν
πύλην ἐκφωνεῖ Σοφία, ὀρθοί, ἀκούσωμεν τοῦ ἁγίου Εὐαγγελίου,
ὁ Πατριάρχης Εἰρήνη πᾶσι, οἱ Χοροὶ Καὶ τῷ πνεύματί σου, ὁ
Ἀρχιδιάκονος ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἄμβωνος Ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ Ματθαῖον ἁγίου
Εὐαγγελίου, καὶ ἀναγινώσκει τὸ ΙΒ΄ καὶ τελευταῖον Εὐαγγέλιον
Τῇ ἐπαύριον ἥτις ἐστὶ μετὰ τὴν Παρασκευήν· μετὰ τὸ
τέλος, ὁ Πατριάρχης εὐλογεῖ, οἱ δὲ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ
ἔτη, ὁ Ἀρχιδιάκονος κατελθὼν ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἄμβωνος φέρει τὸ ἱερὸν
Εὐαγγέλιον τῷ Πατριάρχῃ πρὸς ἀσπασμόν, καὶ ἀσπασάμενος τὴν
χεῖρα τοῦ Πατριάρχου εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Ἱερόν. Μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ
Πατριάρχης λέγει τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ
, ὁ δὲ Ἀναγνώστης Ἱερεὺς τὸ Τρισάγιον, καὶ ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτης
Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία· τότε οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσιν ἐκ τρίτου
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τροπάριον Ἐξηγόρασας ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῆς κατάρας
τοῦ νόμου τῷ τιμίῳ σου αἵματι· εἶτα ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτης
ἔσωθεν, Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεός, κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου
. . ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων
Χριστιανῶν, ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν
. . Ὅτι ἐλεήμων καὶ φιλάνθρωπος Θεὸς ὑπάρχεις· ὁ
Ἱεροδιάκονος Σοφία, ὁ Ἀρχιμανδρίτης Ὁ ὢν εὐλογητὸς Θεὸς
ἡμῶν, ὁ Πατριάρχης Στερεώσαι Κύριος ὁ Θεός, ὁ Μ.
Ἀρχιμανδρίτης Δόξα σοι, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, ἡ ἐλπὶς ἡμῶν, δόξα
σοι, ὁ δι’ ὑπερβάλλουσαν ἀγαθότητα κτλ. Ἐν ᾧ λέγεται ἡ
Ἀπόλυσις,) ὁ Πατριάρχης εὐλογῶν τὸν λαὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ θρόνου, τῶν
Χορῶν ψαλλόντων Τὸν δεσπότην καὶ Ἀρχιερέα ἡμῶν,
κατέρχεται τοῦ θρόνου, καὶ ποιήσας τρὶς τὸ σημεῖον τοῦ Σταυροῦ
ἐξέρχεται τοῦ Ναοῦ μετὰ τῆς αὐτῆς παρατάξεως, τοῦ Ἱερέως
ἐκφωνοῦντος ἀπὸ τοῦ Βήματος Δι’ εὐχῶν τοῦ ἁγίου Δεσπότου
ἡμῶν, φθάσας δὲ εἰς τὸν Νάρθηκα ἀποδύεται τὸν Μανδύαν καὶ
ἀνερχόμενος τὰς βαθμίδας τοῦ Νάρθηκος, στραφεὶς εὐλογεῖ, τοῦ
Μ. Πριμικηρίου ἐκφωνοῦντος τὸν Πολυχρονισμὸν αὐτοῦ2, ἀνελθὼν
δὲ τὴν μεγάλην τῆς Πρωτοσυγκελλίας κλίμακα ἵσταται εἰς τὸν
ἐξώστην καὶ εὐλογήσας αὖθις τὸν ἐν τῷ περιβόλῳ τοῦ Ναοῦ
ἱστάμενον λαὸν ἀναμένοντα καὶ τελευταῖον τὴν πατριαρχικὴν

----------
2. Πολυχρόνιον ποιήσαι Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς τὸν παναγιώτατον καὶ σεβασμιώτατον ἡμῶν αὐθέντην καὶ Δεσπότην τὸν Οἰκουμενικὸν Πατριάρχην κύριον κύριον [δεῖνα] Κύριε φύλαττε αὐτὸν εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη· Ἀμήν.

*(Printed Page 858)*

=== LEAF p874 ===
[English Facing Translation: Service of the Holy Passion Concluded (Gospel 12, Dismissal, and Departure) (p. 859)]

859

head, he says “Bless, Master, the reader of the Gospel.” Placing his hand
on the head of the Great Archdeacon, the Patriarch says “May God,
through the intercessions of the holy and glorious Apostle,” etc. The
Great Archdeacon, repeating “Amen” three times, enters again the Holy
Sanctuary, and, coming out from it through the North Gate, ascends the
Pulpit. At the conclusion of the Idiomelon [“Already the reed has been
painted”], the Great Archimandrite, standing in the Beautiful Gate, exclaims
“Wisdom! Let us stand. Let us hear the Holy Gospel.” Patriarch:
“Peace be with you all.” The Choirs: “And with your spirit.” The
Archdeacon from the Pulpit: “The reading is from the Holy Gospel
according to Matthew”; he then reads the Twelfth and last Gospel “On
the next day, which is the one after Friday” [Matthew 27: 62-66]. At the
end of the reading, the Patriarch blesses the reader and the people, while the
Choirs chant “For many years, [Master].” Descending from the Pulpit, the
Archdeacon brings the Holy Gospel to the Patriarch to venerate by kissing
it. The Archdeacon, after kissing the Patriarch’s hand, enters the Holy
Sanctuary. After the foregoing, the Patriarch says “It is a good thing to
confess unto the Lord.” The Priest-Reader recites the Trisagion, and the
Great Archimandrite exclaims “For Yours is the Kingdom.” Then the
Choirs chant the Apolytikion Troparion [Dismissal Hymn] “You ransomed
us from the curse of the Law by Your Precious Blood,” 3 times. Then the
Great Archimandrite from inside the Holy Sanctuary intones “Have mercy
upon us, O God, according to Your great mercy . . . Again we pray for
all the pious and Orthodox Christians.” “Again, we pray for our
Archbishop [name] . . . For You are a merciful and compassionate
God.” The Deacon: “Wisdom!” The Archimandrite: “You who are
blessed, our God.” The Patriarch: “Strengthen, O Lord God.” The Great
Archimandrite: “Glory to You, Christ God, our hope, glory to You, Who
by Your exceeding goodness,” etc. {During the recitation of the Dismissal
Prayer,} the Patriarch blesses the people from his Throne, as the Choirs sing
“Our Master and Bishop, Lord, preserve and keep him for many years.”
The Patriarch then comes down from his Throne and, crossing himself three
times, exits the Church {Nave} with his entourage, the Priest from the Holy
Sanctuary exclaiming “Through the prayers of our Holy Master.” Having
arrived at the Narthex, the Patriarch takes off his Mandya [Mantle] and,
ascending the stairs of the Narthex, he turns and blesses, while the Great
Primikirios exclaims his Polychonion [Acclamation].2 Having ascended the
great stairs of the Chancellory, the Patriarch stands on the balcony and

----------
2. "Make him live for many years, O Lord God, Your all-holy and most respected lord and Master, the Ecumenical Patriarch, lord, lord (name) Lord, preserve him for many years. Amen."

*(Printed Page 859)*

=== LEAF p875 ===
[Original Greek Text: Consecration of a Temple: Situations 1 and 2 (p. 860)]

860

Εὐλογίαν, εἰσέρχεται διὰ τοῦ διαδρόμου τῆς Πρωτοσυγκελλίας εἰς
τὰ πατριαρχικὰ δωμάτια.

ΔΙΑΤΑΞΙΣ ΤΗΣ ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΙΑΣ
ΕΓΚΑΙΝΙΩΝ ΝΑΟΥ
----------------------------------------

Α΄.

Ἂν τύχωσιν Ἐγκαίνια Ναοῦ ἐν μνήμῃ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου,
ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλονται
Στιχηρὰ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων δ΄, τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου γ΄, καὶ
γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ ἐγκαινιαζομένου Ναοῦ, Δόξα τοῦ ἑορταζομένου
Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, Ἀναγνώσματα β΄ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων
καὶ ἓν τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ ἑορταζομένου
Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ,
καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων.

Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου
καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, ὁ Κανὼν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τοῦ
ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ ἀνὰ δ΄, τὸ
Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ
καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων β΄ τοῦ
ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου γ΄, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Δόξα τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ (ἐὰν μὴ ᾖ ἑορτὴ τῶν Ἀποστόλων, ἢ τοῦ Προδρόμου,
ἢ τῶν Εὐαγγελιστῶν, ἤ τινος τῶν ἐπισήμως ἑορταζομένων Ἁγίων),
Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, ἡ Μεγάλη Δοξολογία καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
τῶν Ἐγκαινίων.

Β΄.

Ἂν τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλονται
Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων γ΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ γ΄,
Δόξα Ἀναγνώσματα τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Ἀπόστιχα,

*(Printed Page 860)*

=== LEAF p876 ===
[English Facing Translation: Consecration of a Temple: Situations 1 and 2 (p. 861)]

861

bestows one final patriarchal blessing upon the waiting people standing in
the Church's courtyard. He then enters the patriarchal chambers [resi-
dence] through the corridor of the Chancellory.

ORDER OF SERVICE FOR THE
CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH
----------------------------------------

Situation One

If the Consecration of a Church takes place on the commemoration of a
celebrating Saint, at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” 4 Stichira of the
Consecration are chanted, 3 of the celebrating Saint and 3 of the Saint
of the Church being consecrated, Glory of the celebrating Saint, Now and
ever of the Consecration. Two Readings of the Consecration and one of the
celebrating Saint. The Aposticha of the celebrating Saint. Glory of the Saint
of the Church and Now and ever of the Consecration. Then, the Apolytikion
of the celebrating Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and that of the
Consecration.
At Matins, the Kathismata of the celebrating Saint and those of the
Consecration instead of the Theotokia. The Canon of the Consecration, that
of the celebrating Saint and that of the Saint of the Church, each ode with
4 hymns. The Exapostilarion of the celebrating Saint, that of the Saint of the
Church and that of the Consecration. At the Praises: 2 Stichira of the
Consecration, 3 of the celebrating Saint and 3 of the Saint of the Church.
Glory of the Saint of the Church (unless it be the Feast of the Apostles, the
Forerunner, the Evangelists or a formally celebrating saint), Now and ever
of the Consecration; the Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the
Consecration.

Situation Two

If the Consecration takes place on a Sunday, at Vespers, at Lord,
I have cried, 4 Stichira of the Resurrection are chanted, 3 of the Consecra-

*(Printed Page 861)*

=== LEAF p877 ===
[Original Greek Text: Consecration of a Temple: Situations 2 (Concluded), 3, and 4 (p. 862)]

862

Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων.

Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα μετὰ τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, ὁ ἀναστάσιμος Κανών, ὁ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων,
καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα
δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων, ἡ Μεγάλη Δοξολογία καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

Γ΄.

Ἂν τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ μνήμης ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου,
ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων β΄, τοῦ ἑορταζομένου
Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ β΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Δόξα τοῦ ἑορταζομένου
Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Ἀναγνώσματα β΄ τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων καὶ ἓν τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων.
Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τοῦ ἑορταζομένου
Ἁγίου καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, ὁ ἀναστάσιμος
Κανών, ὁ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, καὶ ὁ τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων β΄, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ (ἐὰν μὴ ᾖ, ὡς προείρηται, ἡ μνήμη ἐπισήμως ἑορταζομένου
Ἁγίου), Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, ἡ Μεγάλη Δοξολογία καὶ τὸ
Σήμερον σωτηρία.

Δ΄.

Ἂν τύχωσιν ἐν Θεομητορικῇ ἑορτῇ, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ
ψάλλονται Στιχηρὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων γ΄, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων.

*(Printed Page 862)*

=== LEAF p878 ===
[English Facing Translation: Consecration of a Temple: Situations 2 (Concluded), 3, and 4 (p. 863)]

863

tion and 3 of the Saint of the Church, Glory of the Saint of the Church, Now
and ever the 1st Theotokion of the Mode of the week. The Readings of the
Consecration. The Resurrection Aposticha, Glory of the Saint of the
Church, Now and ever of the Consecration. The Resurrection Apolytikion,
that of the Saint of the Church and that of the Consecration.
At Matins, the Resurrection Kathismata and those of the Consecra-
tion in place of the Theotokia. The Resurrection Canon, that of the
Consecration and that of the Saint of the Church. The Resurrection
Exapostilarion, that of the Saint of the Church and that of the Consecration.
At the Praises: 4 Stichira of the Resurrection and 4 of the Consecration.
Glory of the Saint of the Church, Now and ever of the Consecration. Great
Doxology and “Today salvation.”

Situation Three

If the Consecration takes place on a Sunday with the commemora-
tion of a celebrating Saint, at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” 3 Stichira
of the Resurrection are chanted, 2 of the Consecration, 3 of the celebrating
Saint and 2 of the Saint of the Church. Glory of the celebrating Saint, Now
and ever the 1st Theotokion of the Mode of the week. 2 Readings of the
Consecration and 1 of the celebrating Saint. The Resurrection Aposticha,
Glory of the Saint of the Church, Now and ever of the Consecration. The
Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the celebrating Saint, that of the Saint of
the Church and that of the Consecration.
At Matins, the Resurrection Kathismata, those of the celebrating
Saint and those of the Consecration in place of the Theotokia. The
Resurrection Canon, that of the Consecration and that of the celebrating
Saint. The Resurrection Exapostilarion, that of the celebrating Saint, that
of the Saint of the Church and that of the Consecration. At the Praises: 3
Stichira of the Resurrection, 2 of the Consecration and 3 of the celebrating
Saint, Glory of the Saint of the Church (unless, as has been said, it be the
Feast of the Apostles, the Forerunner, the Evangelists or a formally celebrat-
ing saint). Now and ever of the Consecration. Great Doxology and “Today
salvation.”

Situation Four

If the Consecration takes place on a Feast of the Mother of God, at
Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” 4 Stichira of the Feast are chanted, 3 of the
Consecration, 3 of the Saint of the Church, Glory of the Feast, Now and ever

*(Printed Page 863)*

=== LEAF p879 ===
[Original Greek Text: Consecration of a Temple: Situations 4 (Concluded), 5, and 6 (p. 864)]

864

Ἀναγνώσματα β΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἓν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα
τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ
αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς.
Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον καὶ εἰς τὰς γ΄ Στιχολογίας, τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς
ἑορτῆς, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, οἱ Κανόνες τῆς
ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους
τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων β΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου β΄. Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς
Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, ἡ Μεγάλη Δοξολογία καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
τῆς ἑορτῆς.

Ε΄.

Ἂν τύχωσιν ἐν Δεσποτικῇ ἑορτῇ, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ ψάλλονται
τῆς ἑορτῆς ς΄ καὶ β΄ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων, Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς β΄ καὶ ἓν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῆς
ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς.

Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον καὶ εἰς τὰς γ΄ Στιχολογίας, τὸ Κάθισμα
τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, οἱ Κανόνες
τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς,
τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς.
Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων β΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
β΄, Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, ἡ Μεγάλη Δοξολογία
καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.

ΣΤ΄.

Ἂν τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ Θεομητορικῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐν τῷ
Ἑσπερινῷ ψάλλονται Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, καὶ β΄ τῶν
Ἐγκαινίων, Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, Ἀναγνώσματα
β΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ἓν τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Ἀπόστιχα,
Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων.

Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων
καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὁ ἀναστάσιμος Κανών, ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τῶν

*(Printed Page 864)*

=== LEAF p880 ===
[English Facing Translation: Consecration of a Temple: Situations 4 (Concluded), 5, and 6 (p. 865)]

865

of the Consecration. 2 Readings of the Feast and 1 of the Consecration. The
Aposticha of the Feast, Glory of the Saint of the Church, Now and ever of
the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Consecration, that of the
Saint of the Church and again that of the Feast.
At Matins, and in the 3 Stichologie, the Kathisma of the Feast, that
of the Consecration and again that of the Feast. The Canons of the Feast and
that of the Consecration. The Exapostilarion of the Feast, that of the
Consecration, that of the Saint of the Church and that of the Feast again. At
the Praises: 4 Stichira of the Feast, 2 of the Consecration and 2 of the Saint
of the Church. Glory of the Feast, Now and ever of the Consecration. Great
Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.

Situation Five

If the Consecration takes place on a Feast of the Lord, at Vespers,
at “Lord, I have cried,” 6 Stichira of the Feast are chanted and 2 of the
Consecration. Glory of the Feast, Now and ever of the Consecration. 2
Readings of the Feast and 1 of the Consecration. The Aposticha of the Feast,
Glory of the Saint of the Church, Now and ever of the Feast. The
Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Consecration, that of the Saint of the
Church and again that of the Feast.
At Matins, and in the 3 Stichologie, the Kathisma of the Feast, that
of the Consecration and again that of the Feast. The Canons of the Feast and
that of the Consecration. The Exapostilarion of the Feast, that of the Consecra-
tion, that of the Saint of the Church and that of the Feast again. At the Praises:
4 Stichira of the Feast, 2 of the Consecration and 2 of the Saint of the Church.
Glory of the Feast, Now and ever of the Consecration. Great Doxology and
the Apolytikion of the Feast.

Situation Six

If the Consecration takes place on a Sunday with a Feast of the
Theotokos, at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” 4 Stichira of the Resurrec-
tion are chanted, 4 of the Feast and 2 of the Consecration. Glory of the Feast,
Now and ever of the Consecration. 2 Readings of the Feast and 1 of the
Consecration. The Resurrection Aposticha, Glory of the Saint of the
Church, Now and ever of the Feast. The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of
the Feast, that of the Saint of the Church and that of the Consecration.
At Matins, the Resurrection Kathismata, those of the Consecration

*(Printed Page 865)*
