=== LEAF p471 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation IX Concl. (§§ 27–29) (p. 456)]

456

ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 13, 14.
27.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ
τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, καὶ τῆς
ἑορτῆς ς΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν,
καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

28.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς τὸ
Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς (καταλιμπανομένου τοῦ Τριαδικοῦ κανόνος,
ψάλλεται ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς), εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια
ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος
τῆς ἑορτῆς. Καθίσματα ἐν μὲν τῇ α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίᾳ ἀνὰ δύο
Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ μόνα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς,
ἡ Αἴτησις, καὶ μετ᾿ αὐτὴν ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ
Προκείμενον τῆς ἑορτῆς Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, τὸ Πᾶσα
πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ
καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ αὐτό,
ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ
Γαβριήλ, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Ὁ
Λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ ἅπαξ· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ
τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἡ θ΄ τῆς
ἑορτῆς· Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς· εἰς
τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸ
ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.

29.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν
Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Κοντάκιον Τῇ
ὑπερμάχῳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως τὸ Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ (χαρὰν μεγάλην . . . Ὡς
ἐμψύχῳ θεοῦ κιβωτῷ), Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς
καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὁσίου (Ἰωάννου) ψάλλεται
ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτή, ὡς προδιετυπώθη ἐν
περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 18.

*(Printed Page 456)*

=== LEAF p472 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Nine Concl. (§§ 27–29) (p. 457)]

457

in Situation Three, Paragraphs 13 and 14.
27.    On Saturday at the Great Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and
the reading from the Psalter at "Lord, I have cried," we chant 4 Stichira of
the Resurrection and 6 of the Feast. Glory, Now and ever, "Sent from
heaven." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the Feast. At
the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "Today is
the announcement of joy." The Apolytikion of the Resurrection and that
of the Feast twice, and Dismissal.
28.    On Sunday, at Matins after "Blessed is our God," the Trisagion,
Psalm 50 (the Triadic Canon being omitted, the Liti of the Feast is sung);
then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At
"God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter selection of the
day and the Polyeleos of the Feast. Kathismata at the 1st and 2nd Stasis
[Stichologie] 2 of the Resurrection and 1 of the Feast. At the 3rd Stasis only
those of the Feast and the Petition, and after that the Ypakoi of the Mode,
the Anavathmi, and the Prokimenon of the Feast "Proclaim day to day."
Then, "Let everything that has breath," and the Gospel "And Mary arose."
Then "Having beheld the Resurrection," Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "Through
the intercessions of the Theotokos," Now and ever, repeat the same, the
Verse "Have mercy on me, O God" and the Idiomelon "Gabriel an-
nounces." Canons of the Resurrection and that of the Feast. After the 3rd
Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma "The
Word of God" (once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast
and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth" and the 9th
Ode of the Feast. Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection and of the Feast. At
the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Feast. Glory, Now and
ever, "The mystery before all time." Great Doxology and "Today salva-
tion"
29.    At the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, the Entrance Hymn
"Proclaim day by day . . . who is risen from the dead," the Resurrection
Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Kontakion "To the
Champion General," Apostolos and Gospel of the Feast. At "Especially,"
"O Earth, announce good tidings of great joy {. . . As a live ark of God},"
Communion Hymn of the Feast, "We have seen the [true] light" and the
Dismissal. The Service of the Righteous {St. John} is chanted at Compline.
    The Leave-taking of the Feast that evening as prescribed in Situa-
tion Three, Paragraph 18.

*(Printed Page 457)*

=== LEAF p473 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation X (§§ 30–31) (p. 458)]

458

Ι΄.

30.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Ε΄ καὶ ΣΤ΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῷ
Σαββάτῳ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον,
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, Προεόρτια γ΄, καὶ τοῦ Τριῳ-
δίου γ΄. Δόξα, Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ ἔγνω, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ
ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα,
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Εὐαγγελίζεται
ὁ Γαβριήλ, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Προεόρτιον,
καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

31    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ προεόρτιον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ
ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ
καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τοῦ ἤχου, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ (κανονικὰ, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ
προηγεῖται τῶν Ἀναβαθμῶν). Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ
Προεόρτιος, οὗ ὁ Στίχος Δόξα, σοι ὁ Θεός· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ
προεόρτιον Κάθισμα Σήμερον ἅπασα ἅπαξ· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ
Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ
Τριῳδίου· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ
ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου·
εἶτα μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ
τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄
καὶ Προεόρτια Κατοικτιρήσας τῷ Πλάσματι ὁ Πλάστης δ΄. Δόξα τοῦ
Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. Σήμερον
σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, ἐν ᾗ
ψάλλονται τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Κοντάκιον Ἐπελεύσει
Πνεύματος, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, Κοινωνικὸν
Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ πρωΐ, ψάλλεται
Ἀκολουθία τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, ὡς
διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτή, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει
Γ΄ § 18.

*(Printed Page 458)*

=== LEAF p474 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Ten (§§ 30–31) (p. 459)]

459

SITUATION TEN

30.    If the Feast occurs on the Monday of the 5th and the 6th Week, {this
apparently is a typographical error; it should actually be the 5th week, since
Situations 11 - 15, which follow, all refer to Situations occurring between
the 4th Sunday, Saint John of the Ladder, and the 5th Sunday, Saint Mary
of Egypt}, on Saturday at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the
reading from the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant 4 Stichira of the
Resurrection, 3 of the Pre-feast, and 3 of the Triodion. Glory, "The
language I knew not," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode.
Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Gabriel
proclaims." Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, and of the
Pre-feast and Dismissal.
31.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the
Triadic "It is meet"; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast, and the
Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion of the Resurrection,
that of the Triodion and that of the Pre-feast, the Psalter and the Amomos.
The Resurrection Kathismata, the Evlogitafia, the Anavathmi and the
Prokimenon of the Mode, the Ypakoi. {The Ypakoi should precede the
Anavathmi}. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Pre-feast, with the
Verse "Glory to You, O God." After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Pre-
feast "Today all" once; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and
Ikos, the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "I
shall open my mouth" and the entire order of the Matins Gospel as
prescribed in the Triodion. Following "More honorable," Exapostilaria:
of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Pre-feast. At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Pre-feast "The Creator pitying His
creature," Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great
Doxology, "Today salvation." Then follows the Liturgy of Saint Basil, in
which we sing the Typika and the Beatitudes. Kontakion "Through the
descent of the Holy Spirit," Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday, Commun-
ion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal.

    That Sunday evening and Monday morning, the Service of the
Feast is celebrated together with the Liturgy of Chrysostom as prescribed
in Situation One, Paragraphs 3 - 5.
    The Leave-taking of the Feast is celebrated that evening as pre-
scribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 18.

*(Printed Page 459)*

=== LEAF p475 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XI Opening (§§ 32–34) (p. 460)]

460

ΙΑ΄.

32.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Ε΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Δευτέρᾳ
πρωῒ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου Προσόμοια, καὶ τὰ γ΄
Προεόρτια Κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Εὐαγγελίζεται
ὁ Γαβριήλ, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ δύο τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἰδιόμελα Ὡς ὁ περιπεσών, τὸ
Ἀποσφαλέντες ἐκ παραβάσεως, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν· εἶτα τὰ κατ᾿
ἀλφάβητον Στιχηρὰ Ἅπας ὁ βίος μου, ὧν ὁ Στίχος Δόξα, σοι, ὁ θεὸς
ἡμῶν, δόξα σοι, μέχρι τέλους· Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον,
τὸ Θεοτόκε παρθένε μετὰ Μενοιῶν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται, μετὰ Ἀποδείπνου μικροῦ, ὁ Μέγας
Κανών, Κοντάκιον, μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ψυχή μου, ψυχή μου, καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Τρίτῃ πρωΐ, ἡ τῆς Παραμονῆς Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς
διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον
Τὴν τετραυματισμένην μου ψυχήν, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, Δόξα, Καὶ
νῦν, Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ ἔγνω, τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον Σήμερον τῆς παγκοσμίου, αἱ Ὧραι λιταί,
καὶ μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας, Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Τρίτῃ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Τετάρτῃ πρωῒ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς
ἑορτῆς ψάλλεται μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου ὡς
διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

33.    Τὸ ἑσπέρας τῆς Τετάρτης, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ
Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια καὶ γ΄ τοῦ
Ἀρχαγγέλου· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ, Εἴσοδος,
Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα,
τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς
Εὐαγγέλια, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
34.    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν τὰ κατανυκτικὰ
Τροπάρια Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, Κύριε ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος· οἱ
Στίχοι Ἐκ νυκτὸς ὀρθρίζει κτλ. καὶ τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα· μετὰ τὴν τοῦ
Ψαλτηρίου α΄ Στιχολογίαν τὰ κατανυκτικὰ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου Καθίσμα-
τα, μετὰ τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν, τὰ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ἡ

*(Printed Page 460)*

=== LEAF p476 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Eleven Opening (§§ 32–34) (p. 461)]

461

SITUATION ELEVEN

32.    If the Feast occurs on Wednesday of the 5th Week, on Monday
morning at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have cried"
we sing the three Prosomia of the Triodion, and the three of the Pre-feast
"Hidden mystery," Glory, Now and ever, "Gabriel proclaims." "O
Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. At the Aposticha: the 2
Idiomela of the Triodion "As one who has fallen," "Those falling from
disobedience," the Hymn to the Martyrs; then the Alphabetical Stichira "I
have wasted all my life" with the Verse "Glory to You, our God, glory to
You," until the end. Then "Lord, now let," the Trisagion, "Theotokos
Virgin" with Prostrations and Dismissal.
    In the evening the Small Compline and the Great Canon are sung.
Following the Trisagion, the Kontakion "My soul, my soul," and Dismissal.

    On Tuesday morning, the Service of the Eve is celebrated as
prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 2. At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon
"My wounded soul," and the Hymn to the Martyrs, Glory, Now and ever,
"The language I knew not." Then "It is good to confess." The Trisagion.
The Apolytikion of the Pre-feast "Today is the prelude of joy," the Hours
(read), and the Dismissal following the Prayer of the 6th hour.
    On Tuesday evening and Wednesday morning, the Service of the
Feast is sung with the Liturgy of Chrysostom as prescribed in Situation One,
Paragraphs 3 - 5.

The Leave-taking

33.    On Wednesday evening, following the Introductory Psalm, at
"Lord, I have cried" we chant the 3 Prosomia of the Feast and the 3 of the
Archangel; Glory, Now and ever, "Sent from heaven." Entrance, "O
Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the
3 Idiomela of the Feast, Glory, Now and ever, "Today is the announcement
of Joy." The Apolytikion (three times) and Dismissal.
34.    On Thursday morning, after the Midnight Service, the Penitential
Hymns "Have mercy on us, Lord have mercy on us," and the Exapsalmos,
the Verses "My spirit seeks You" etc., and "Alleluia"; following the First
Stasis of the Psalter, we chant the penitential Kathismata of the Octoichos;
following the Second Stasis, we chant those of the Triodion, then Psalm 50.

*(Printed Page 461)*

=== LEAF p477 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XI Concl. (§§ 34–35 & Historical Note) (p. 462)]

462

Στιχολογία τῶν θ΄ Ὠδῶν καὶ ἡ α΄ καὶ γ΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ
Ἀρχαγγέλου, ὁ Εἱρμός, ἡ Αἴτησις καὶ τὰ Καθίσματα τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς
τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου, εἶτα ἡ δ΄ Ὠδὴ μετὰ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ἡ ε΄ καὶ ἡ
ς΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ ὁ Εἱρμός, ἡ Αἴτησις, τὸ Κοντάκιον
Ψυχή μου, ψυχή μου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου.
Εἶτα ἀντὶ τῆς ζ΄ Ὠδῆς, οἱ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ Μακαρισμοὶ μετὰ Στίχου
Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, ἐλέησόν με· ἡ η΄ καὶ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου
καὶ τὰ Τριῴδια τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς καὶ τῆς θ΄. Εἶτα Αἰνοῦμεν, εὐλογοῦμεν
καὶ ὁ Εἱρμὸς Ὃν στρατιαί· μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἀσπόρου
συλλήψεως, τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Φωταγωγικόν, τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει
καὶ μετὰ τὴν Ἐκτενῆ, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῶν Ἀποστίχων Ταῖς λῃ-
στρικαῖς ἐφόδοις δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν.    Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Εὐφραινέσθωσαν οἱ οὐρανοί, Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι
τῷ Κυρίῳ, τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ἐν τῷ Ναῷ ἑστῶτες, τὸ Κύριε
ἐλέησον μ΄, Ὁ ὢν εὐλογητός, τὸ Ἐπουράνιε Βασιλεῦ, τὰς
τρεῖς Μετανοίας (ἐδῶ ὑπονοεῖται ἡ Προσευχὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἐφραίμ)·
καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι λιταί, Ἀπολυτίκιον Τῶν οὐρανίων
στρατιῶν καὶ Κοντάκιον Ψυχή μου, ψυχή μου μετὰ τὴν θ΄ οἱ
Μακαρισμοί, καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ Ἑσπερινός.

35.    Εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Αὐτεξουσίως ἐξεδύθην δίς, καὶ
τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, καὶ γ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου. Δόξα, Καὶ
νῦν, Τῷ ἕκτῳ μηνί, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὰ δύο Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ
Τριῳδίου, καὶ τὸ ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ Κύριος ἔκτησέ με, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω,
καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων, Κοινωνικὸν Γεύσασθε.

    Σημ. Τῷ ,αωπα΄, ἐπὶ τῆς πατριαρχείας Ἰωακεὶμ τοῦ Γ΄,
συνέπεσεν ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Ε΄
ἑβδομάδος καὶ ἐψάλη ὁ Μέγας Κανὼν κατ᾿ ἀπόφασιν Συνοδικὴν
οὕτω· τὸ ἑσπέρας τῆς Τετάρτης, μετὰ τὴν τελείαν Ἀπόλυσιν τοῦ
Ἑσπερινοῦ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς, εὐθὺς Εὐλογητὸς ὁ
Θεός, τὸ μικρὸν Ἀπόδειπνον· μετὰ τὸ Δόξα ἐν ὑψίστοις ἐψάλη
ὁ Κανών, μετὰ τὴν Θ΄ Ὠδὴν ὁ Εἱρμὸς Ἀσπόρου συλλήψεως, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ψυχή μου, ψυχή μου, τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον
μ΄, Ὁ ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ, τὸ Ἄσπιλε ἀμόλυντε κτλ. καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
Τῷ πρωῒ τῇ Πέμπτῃ ὁ Ὄρθρος καὶ ἡ Προηγιασμένη Λειτουργία
ἐψάλησαν ὡς ἀνωτέρω § 34, 35.

*(Printed Page 462)*

=== LEAF p478 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Eleven Concl. (§§ 34–35 & Historical Note) (p. 463)]

463

Then follow the chanting of the 9 Odes and the 1st and 3rd Ode of the Canon
of the Archangel, the Irmos, the Petition and the Kathismata of the 3rd Ode
of the Archangel, then the 4th Ode with that of the Triodion, and the 5th and
6th Odes of the Archangel; after the 6th Ode, the Irmos, the Petition, the
Kontakion "My soul, my soul," the Minologion and the Postscript of the
Triodion. Then, instead of the 7th Ode, we chant the Beatitudes in the
Triodion with the Verse "Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me";
then the 8th and 9th Odes of the Archangel, and the Triodia of the 8th and
9th Odes. Then "We praise, bless and worship the Lord" and the Irmos
"Whom the hosts of heaven"; following "More honorable," we sing "Of
conception without seed." Then "It is meet," the Photagogikon [Hymn of
Light], the "To You belongs glory" and, following the Ektenis, the Idiomelon
of the Aposticha "Into the bushes of thieves" (twice) and the Hymn to the
Martyrs; Glory, Now and ever, "Rejoice, O heavens." Then, "It is a good
thing to give thanks to the Lord," the Trisagion, "Standing in the
Temple," "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), "The one who is blessed," "O
heavenly King," the three Prostrations {this is understood to mean the
Prayer of Saint Ephraim} — and the Hours are read. Apolytikion "The
arch-generals of the heavenly armies" and the Kontakion "My soul, my
soul"; after the 9th Hour we sing the Beatitudes, and then Vespers begins.
35.    At Vespers after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at
"Lord, I have cried" we chant the Idiomelon "Of my own free will" (twice)
and the Hymn to the Martyrs (once), and the 3 Prosomia of the Archangel.
Glory, Now and ever, "In the sixth month." Entrance, "O Gladsome
Light," the two Readings from the Triodion [Genesis 18:20-33, Proverbs
16:17-17:17], and the one from the Mineon "The Lord built me" [Proverbs
8:22-30]. Then "Let my prayer arise" and the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified
Gifts, Communion Hymn "Taste {and see}."

    Note: In 1881, during the Patriarchate of Joachim the 3rd, the Feast
of the Annunciation occurred on Wednesday of the 5th Week, and by
Synodical decision, the Great Canon was celebrated in this manner: on
Wednesday evening, following the complete Dismissal of the Vespers of
the Leave-taking of the Feast, immediately "Blessed is our God" and the
Small Compline; after "Glory in the highest," the Canon was sung; after
the 9th Ode, the Irmos "Of conception without seed." The Trisagion, the
Kontakion "My soul, my soul"; "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), "You who
at all times," the "O Lady Bride of God" etc., and the Dismissal. On
Thursday morning, the Matins and the Pre-sanctified Liturgy were cel-
ebrated as above in Paragraphs 34, 35.

*(Printed Page 463)*

=== LEAF p479 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XII (§ 36) & Situation XIII Opening (§ 37) (p. 464)]

464

ΙΒ΄.

36.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Πέμπτῃ τοῦ Μεγάλου Κανόνος, τῇ Τρίτῃ
πρωῒ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ
Τριῳδίου γ΄ Προσόμοια, καὶ τὰ γ΄ Προεόρτια. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς
ἡμέρας. τὰ δύο Ἰδιόμελα τῶν Ἀποστίχων, τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν καὶ τὰ κατ᾿
ἀλφάβητον Στιχηρὰ Ἅπας ὁ βίος μου, ὁ Στίχος Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός,
εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, Θεοτόκε Παρθένε, Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Ἐπουράνιε
Βασιλεῦ, τὰς γ΄ Μετανοίας, (ὑπονοεῖται ἐδῶ ἡ Προσευχὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου
Ἐφραίμ) τὴν εὐχὴν Παναγία Τριάς, τὸ Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον,
καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρας (δήλ. Τρίτης), ψάλλεται μετ᾿
Ἀποδείπνου μικροῦ ὁ Μέγας Κανών, ὡς εἴθισται· μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον,
τὸ Κοντάκιον Ψυχή μου, ψυχή μου κτλ. καὶ Ἀπόλυσις
    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ πρωΐ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς Παραμονῆς
καὶ αἱ Ὧραι ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2· μετὰ
δὲ τὴν εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας, Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ αὐτῇ Τετάρτῃ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωΐ, ἡ τῆς ἑορτῆς
Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτή, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει
Γ΄ § 18.

ΙΓ΄.

37.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς Ε΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Τετάρτῃ
πρωῒ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον,
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἱστῶμεν Στίχους ιστ΄, ἀρχόμενοι ἀπὸ τοῦ
Στίχου Ἐν ὁδῷ ταύτῃ ᾗ ἐπορευόμην, καὶ ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον
Τοῖς τῶν ἐμῶν λογισμῶν δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, εἶτα ἐκ
τῶν κατ᾿ ἀλφάβητον Στιχηρῶν Ἅπας ὁ βίος μου ι΄, καὶ γ΄
Προεόρτια· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ. Εἴσοδος,
Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω,
καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται, μετ᾿ Ἀποδείπνου μικροῦ, ὁ Μέγας
Κανών, ὡς εἴθισται, Κοντάκιον, μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ψυχή μου, ψυχή
μου κτλ.

*(Printed Page 464)*

=== LEAF p480 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Twelve (§ 36) & Situation Thirteen Opening (§ 37) (p. 465)]

465

SITUATION TWELVE

36.    If the Feast occurs on the Thursday of the Great Canon, on Tuesday
morning at Vespers, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant the three Prosomia of
the order of the Triodion and the 3 of the Pre-feast, Glory, Now and ever,
"Gabriel proclaims." "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day.
The two Idiomela of the Aposticha, the Hymn to the Martyrs and the
Alphabetic Stichira "I have wasted all my life," the Verse "Glory to You,
O God"; then the Trisagion, "Theotokos, Virgin" "Lord, have mercy" (40
times), "O heavenly King," the three Prostrations {this is understood to
mean the Prayer of Saint Ephraim}, the Prayer "All-holy Trinity," the "I
will bless the Lord," and Dismissal.
    The evening of that day {i.e. Tuesday}, the Great Canon is
celebrated with the Small Compline as is the custom; following the
Trisagion, the Kontakion "My soul, my soul" etc., and Dismissal.
    On Wednesday morning, the Matins of the Eve and the Hours are
celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 2; after the Prayer of
the 6th Hour, the Dismissal.
    On that Wednesday evening and Thursday morning, the Service of
the Feast is sung as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3 -5.
    The Leave-taking of the Feast that evening is performed as pre-
scribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 18.

SITUATION THIRTEEN

37.    If the Feast occurs on Friday of the 5th Week, on Wednesday
morning at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at
"Lord, I have cried," we insert 16 verses beginning with the Verse "On the
road upon which I was walking" {Psalm 141:4} and we sing the Idiomelon
"In my thoughts" twice and the Hymn to the Martyrs once, then from the
Alphabetical Stichira "I have wasted all my life" (10), and 3 of the Pre-
feast; Glory, Now and ever, "Gabriel announces." Entrance, "O Glad-
some Light," the Readings of the Triodion. Then "Let my prayer arise" and
the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified.
    In the evening the Great Canon is sung with the Small Compline as
is the custom; after the Trisagion, the Kontakion "My soul, my soul," etc.

*(Printed Page 465)*
