=== LEAF p231 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 13: St. John Chrysostom Concl. / November 14: Holy Apostle Philip / November 16: Holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew (p. 216)]

216

Πολυέλεος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, καὶ τὰ τῆς γ΄ στιχολογίας Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὰ ἀναστάσιμα, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου, τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος ναὸς, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν. Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙΔ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀποστόλου Φιλίππου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἀποστόλου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
    Εἰ δὲ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, ὅρα τὴν διάταξιν ἐν τῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀποστόλου Λουκᾶ (Ὀκτωβρίου ιη΄). Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν· Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν ὁ Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον κτλ.

Τῇ ΙΣΤ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀποστόλου καὶ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Ματθαίου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἀποστόλου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸ Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ δ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Καὶ νῦν Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτὴς μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ Θεοτοκίον Σὲ τὴν μεσιτεύσασαν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 216)*

=== LEAF p232 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 13: St. John Chrysostom Concl. / November 14: Holy Apostle Philip / November 16: Holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew (p. 217)]

217

at the third Stasis [Stichologia] that of the Saint with the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection (read), then the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria of the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple." Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 14th.    The Holy Apostle Philip.

1.    If the commemoration of the Apostle occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, see the order of the service of the Holy Apostle Luke (October 18). At the Praises: Glory the Eothinon. In the Liturgy, the Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. Communion Hymn "Praise the Lord," etc.

The 16th.    The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew.

1.    If the commemoration of the Apostle occurs on any day except Sunday, his Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Evangelist, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, "My creator and saviour"; the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Evangelist, the Theotokion "You, the intercessor," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 217)*

=== LEAF p233 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 16: Holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew Concl. / November 20: Forefeast of the Entrance of the Theotokos (p. 218)]

218

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς μετὰ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ δ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία· καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ· Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Κ΄.    Τὰ προεόρτια τῆς ἐν τῷ Ναῷ Εἰσόδου τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου καὶ τῶν ἁγίων Γρηγορίου τοῦ Δεκαπολίτου καὶ Πατρόκλου Κωνσταντινουπόλεως.

1.    Ἄν τύχωσι τὰ Προεόρτια τῆς Θεοτόκου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Προεόρτιος Ἀκολουθία μετὰ τῆς τῶν Ἁγίων ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
2.    Ἄν δὲ τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ Προεόρτια δ΄. Δόξα Σήμερον ὁ θεοχώρητος Ναὸς, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Δεῦτε πάντες οἱ πιστοὶ, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ Προεόρτιον Χαρὰν προμνηστεύεται καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ

*(Printed Page 218)*

=== LEAF p234 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 16: Holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew Concl. / November 20: Forefeast of the Entrance of the Theotokos (p. 219)]

219

3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic "It is meet," then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Apostle and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Evangelist. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion of the Evangelist, his Kathisma and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion; the Katavasia "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Evangelist and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Evangelist, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation." Then follows the Liturgy, in which are sung the 4 Typika and Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Evangelist. Apostolos and Gospel of the Evangelist, Communion Hymn "To all the earth," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 20th    Pre-feast of the Feast of the Entrance of the Theotokos into the Temple, and Saints Gregory the Decapolite and Patroclos, [Archbishop] of Constantinople.

1.    If the Pre-feast of the Theotokos occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service of the Pre-feast together with that of the Saints is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Pre-feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Pre-feast. Glory, "Today, the Temple that is to hold God," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "Come all the faithful"; the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Pre-feast "Anna is now preparing a great joy," and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion twice and of the Pre-Feast once, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrec-

*(Printed Page 219)*

=== LEAF p235 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 20: Forefeast Concl. / November 21: Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple (p. 220)]

220

Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, καὶ ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων τὰ Προεόρτια, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος, ὁ Στίχος Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τὸ Προεόρτιον Εὐφροσύνης σήμερον ἅπαξ· {Αὐτὸ πρέπει νὰ εἶναι λάθος, διότι ὁ ὕμνος Εὐφροσύνης σήμερον εἶναι τὸ προεόρτιον Κοντάκιον — ὅρα §4 κάτωθι — ἐνῷ τὸ Κάθισμα τὸ ὁποῖον συνιστᾷ τὸ Μηναῖον εἶναι τὸ Ὁ ναὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ}· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ Προεόρτια (τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῶν Αἴνων) δ΄. Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινὸν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία·
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Προεορτίου Κανόνος. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ προεόρτιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Εὐφροσύνης σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΚΑ΄.    Ἡ ἐν τῷ Ναῷ Εἴσοδος τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου.

5.    Ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν εἰς ς΄ τὰ Στιχηρὰ (τῆς ἑορτῆς) Σήμερον πιστοὶ καὶ τὰ Τῶν Ἁγίων εἰς Ἅγια. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν, Μετὰ τὸ τεχθῆναί σε. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Προσόμοια Χαίρει ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον τὰ στίφη τῶν πιστῶν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς εὐδοκίας ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
6.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ἡ Λιτή· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία μου, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἄκουσον, θύγατερ, καὶ ἴδε, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα. Δόξα Σήμερον

*(Printed Page 220)*

=== LEAF p236 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 20: Forefeast Concl. / November 21: Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple (p. 221)]

221

tion Kathismata and, in place of the Theotokia, we do the Kathismata of the Pre-feast. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Pre-feast, with the Verse "Most Holy Theotokos." After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Pre-feast "Filled with joy today," once {Note: This must be an error since the hymn "Filled with joy today" is in actuality the Kontakion of the Pre-feast — see Paragraph 4 below — whereas the Kathisma indicated in the Mineon is "The temple of God"}; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria of the Resurrection and of the Pre-feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Pre-feast (the Aposticha of the Praises). Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation"
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Pre-feast, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "Filled with joy today." Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 21st.    The Entrance of the Theotokos into the Temple.

5.    In Great Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the first Stasis of the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 6 Stichira [of the Feast] "Today the faithful" and "In the Holy of Holies." Glory, Now and ever, "After your birth." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Prosomia "Heaven and earth rejoice," Glory, Now and ever, "Today the masses of the faithful"; the Apolytikion "Today is the foreshadowing" (3 times), and Dismissal.

6.    In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion [of the Feast] and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion (3 times) the Psalter and the Polyeleos "My heart is overflowing." The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon "Listen, O daughter, and see"; then the "Let everything that has breath" and the Gospel "And Mary arose," then Psalm 50 (read). Glory, "Today the living temple," Now and ever repeat the same hymn,

*(Printed Page 221)*

=== LEAF p237 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 21: Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple Cont. (p. 222)]

222

ὁ ναὸς ὁ ἔμψυχος, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτὸ· Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον, τῆς Λιτῆς Σήμερον ὁ θεοχώρητος Ναὸς, οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι, ὧν ὁ στίχος Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὰ δύο Καθίσματα, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται· εἰς τὴν θ΄ ψάλλονται οἱ δύο Κανόνες τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων ὡς ἑξῆς·

Διὰ τὸν εἰς ἦχον δ΄ πρῶτον Κανόνα.

Ἄγγελοι τὴν Εἴσοδον τῆς Παρθένου ὁρῶντες
ἐξεπλήττοντο, πῶς μετὰ δόξης εἰσῆλθεν, εἰς τὰ Ἅγια
τῶν Ἁγίων.
Ἄγγελοι τὴν Εἴσοδον τῆς Πανάγνου ὁρῶντες
ἐξεπλήττοντο, πῶς παραδόξως εἰσῆλθεν, εἰς τὰ Ἅγια τῶν
Ἁγίων.
Ἄγγελοι καὶ ἄνθρωποι τῆς Παρθένου τὴν Εἴσοδον
τιμήσωμεν, ὅτι ἐν δόξῃ εἰσῆλθεν, εἰς τὰ Ἅγια τῶν Ἁγίων.
Ἄγγελοι σκιρτήσατε σὺν ἁγίοις Παρθένοι συγχορεύσατε·
ἡ γὰρ θεόπαις εἰσῆλθεν, εἰς τὰ Ἅγια τῶν Ἁγίων.

Διὰ τὸν εἰς ἦχον α΄ δεύτερον Κανόνα.

Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου τὴν προσενεχθεῖσαν ἐν τῷ Ναῷ
Κυρίου καὶ εὐλογηθεῖσαν, χερσὶ τῶν Ἱερέων. Δίς.
Δόξα, Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου τῆς Τρισυποστάτου . . .
Καὶ νῦν, Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου τὴν τιμιωτέραν . . .

Καταβασία Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου τὴν τιμιωτέραν καὶ
ἐνδοξοτέραν τῶν ἄνω στρατευμάτων· Μυστήριον ξένον, τὸ
Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ἥν πάλαι προκατήγγειλεν ἐκ τρίτου. Εἰς
τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ Προσόμοια Λαμπαδηφόροι Παρθένοι εἰς δ΄.
Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον τῷ ναῷ προσάγεται, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη
καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.

*(Printed Page 222)*

=== LEAF p238 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 21: Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple Cont. (p. 223)]

223

then the Verse "God Have mercy upon me" and the Idiomelon of the Liti "Today the God-containing temple." Both Canons, with the Verse "Most Holy Theotokos." After the 3rd Ode, the two Kathismata; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born," at the 9th Ode the two Canons of the 9th Ode are sung with the Megalynaria as follows:

For the First Canon in Mode IV.

Angels beholding the entry of the Virgin, were struck with
amazement seeing how she entered with Glory into the Holy of Holies.
Angels beholding the entry of the All-pure, were struck with
amazement seeing how she entered marvellously into the Holy of Holies.
Angels and men, let us honor the entry of the Virgin, for in Glory
she has gone into the Holy of Holies.
O you angels, dance with the saints: O you virgins, make glad with
them. For the Child of God has entered into the Holy of Holies.

For the Second Canon in Mode I.

O my soul, magnify her who was led into the temple of the Lord
and blessed by the hands of the priests. (twice)
Glory, O my soul, magnify the power of the indivisible Godhead
in three Persons.
Now and ever, O my soul, magnify her who is greater in honor and
more glorious than the hosts above.
Katavasia "O my soul, magnify her who is greater in honor and
more glorious than the hosts above. A strange and most wonderful
mystery"; the Exapostilarion "Whom the multitude of Prophets foretold"
(3 times). At the Praises: the 4 Prosomia "The virgins bearing lamps,"
Glory, Now and ever, "Today the Virgin is brought to the Temple," Great
Doxology and the Apolytikion.

*(Printed Page 223)*

=== LEAF p239 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 21: Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple Cont. (Antiphons) (p. 224)]

224

7.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα·

Ἀντίφωνον α΄.

Μέγας Κύριος καὶ αἰνετὸς σφόδρα.
Δεδοξασμένα ἐλαλήθη περὶ σοῦ, ἡ πόλις τοῦ Θεοῦ.
Ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ταῖς βάρεσιν αὐτῆς γινώσκεται.
Καθάπερ ἠκούσαμεν οὕτω καὶ εἴδομεν.

Ἀντίφωνον β΄.

Ἠγίασε τὸ σκήνωμα αὐτοῦ ὁ Ὕψιστος.
Ἁγιωσύνη καὶ μεγαλοπρέπεια ἐν τῷ ἁγιάσματι αὐτοῦ.
Αὕτη ἡ πύλη Κυρίου, δίκαιοι εἰσελεύσονται ἐν αὐτῇ.
Ἅγιος ὁ ναός σου, θαυμαστὸς ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ.

Ἀντίφωνον γ΄.

Τὸ πρόσωπόν σου λιτανεύσουσιν οἱ πλούσιοι τοῦ λαοῦ.
Πᾶσα ἡ Δόξα τῆς θυγατρὸς τοῦ βασιλέως ἔσωθεν ἐν κροσσωτοῖς χρυσοῖς περιβεβλημένη, πεποικιλμένη.
Ἀπενεχθήσονται τῷ Βασιλεῖ παρθένοι ὀπίσω αὐτῆς.

*(Printed Page 224)*

=== LEAF p240 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 21: Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple Cont. (Antiphons) (p. 225)]

225

7.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

Antiphon One

Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised. (Ps. 47:2)
Glorious things have been spoken of you, O city of God. (Ps. 86:3)
God is known in her palaces for a refuge. (Ps. 47:4)
As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God. (Ps. 47:9)

{Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, Now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.}

Antiphon Two

The Most High hath sanctified His tabernacle. (Ps. 45:5)
Holiness and majesty are in His sanctuary. (Ps. 95:6)
This is the gate of the Lord, by which the righteous shall enter. (Ps. 117:20)
Holy is Your temple, and wonderful in righteousness. (Ps. 64:5-6)
{Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, Now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
O Only-begotten Son and Word of God ... }

Antiphon Three

Even the rich among the people shall entreat your favor. (Ps. 44:13)
The King's daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold. (Ps. 44:14)
Virgins shall be brought to the King after her. (Ps. 44:15)

*(Printed Page 225)*
