=== LEAF p421 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 24: First and Second Finding of the Precious Head of the Forerunner; Situations I–V (§§ 1–5) (p. 406)]

406

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.
1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ αὕτη ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἀπὸ τῆς Πέμπτης τῆς ἑβδομάδος τοῦ Ἀσώτου μέχρι τῆς Παρασκευῆς τῆς Τυρινῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.

Β΄.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία προψάλλεται τῇ Παρασκευῇ μετὰ τῆς τοῦ ἁγίου Πολυκάρπου, ἡ δὲ τῶν Ψυχῶν ψάλλεται ἀμεταθέτως τῷ Σαββάτῳ.

Γ΄.
3.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω, ἢ τῆς Τυρινῆς, τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας ὅρα ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους, ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 3, 4, 5.

Δ΄.
4.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Τυρινῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους ἐν περιπτώσει Ϛ΄ § 10, 11.

Ε΄.
5.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ προψάλλεται τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Τυρινῆς, κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ Ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 3, 4, 5.

*(Printed Page 406)*

=== LEAF p422 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 24: First and Second Finding of the Precious Head of the Forerunner; Situations One to Five (§§ 1–5) (p. 407)]

407

SITUATION ONE
1.    If this Feast occurs on any day except Sunday, from Thursday of the Week of the Prodigal until Friday of Dairy Week, the Service is chanted as prescribed in the Mineon.

SITUATION TWO
2.    If the Feast occurs on Saturday of the Souls, the Service is sung in advance on Friday together with that of Saint Polycarp, whereas the Service of the Saturday of the Souls is sung, without being moved, on Saturday.

SITUATION THREE
3.    If the Feast occurs on the Sunday of Meatfare, or Cheesefare, for the order of service see the Feast of Saint Charalampos in Situation 3, Paragraphs 3, 4, 5.

SITUATION FOUR
4.    If the Feast occurs on Saturday of Cheesefare, the Service is chanted according to the order of the Service of Saint Charalampos in Situation 6, Paragraphs 10, 11.

SITUATION FIVE
5.    If the Feast occurs on the Monday of the First week of Lent, the Service is chanted in advance on the Sunday of Cheesefare, according to the order of service of the Feast of Saint Charalampos in Situation 3, Paragraphs 3, 4, 5.

*(Printed Page 407)*

=== LEAF p423 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 24: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner; Situation VI (§§ 6–8) (p. 408)]

408

ΣΤ΄.
6.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τρίτῃ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῇ Δευτέρᾳ πρωῒ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ψάλλομεν γ΄ Προσόμοια τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Προδρόμου Χαίροις ἡ ἱερὰ κεφαλή, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον, τὸ Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἰδιόμελον δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτοκίον, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
7.    Τῇ Τρίτῃ πρωῒ μετὰ τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐκ γῆς ἀνατείλασα δίς, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ Α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἐκεῖ ἐξανατελῶ κτλ. τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ σοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἡ τῶν θείων ἐννοιῶν, ὁ Κανὼν Ὑγρὰν διοδεύσας καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου κτλ. αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια Ἤνοιξε Προπύλαια εἰς δ΄, Δόξα, Τὴν πανσεβάσμιον κάραν, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος, Δοξολογία Μ. τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι, ἐν αἷς λέγεται Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐκ γῆς ἀνατείλασα, καὶ Κοντάκιον Προφῆτα Θεοῦ καὶ Πρόδρομε. Εἰς τὴν Θ΄ Ὥραν ψάλλονται οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ ὡς εἴθισται, καθὼς διετάχθησαν ἐν τῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους ἑορτῇ ἐν περιπτώσει Η΄ § 14.
8.    Εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ τῶν Ἀποστίχων Ἰδιόμελον τῆς ἡμέρας δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, εἶτα τὰ γ΄ τοῦ Τριῳδίου Προσόμοια καὶ δ΄ τοῦ Προδρόμου Δεῦτε τὴν τιμίαν κεφαλήν, Δόξα, Ἡ τῶν θείων ἐννοιῶν, Καὶ νῦν Σταυροθεοτοκίον, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα (τῆς ἡμέρας ἐκ τοῦ Τριῳδίου), τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὸ Νῦν αἱ δυνάμεις, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς Μνημόσυνον, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 408)*

=== LEAF p424 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 24: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner; Situation Six (§§ 6–8) (p. 409)]

409

SITUATION SIX
6.    If the Feast occurs on Tuesday of the First Week of Lent, on Monday morning after the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing the Prosomia of the order of the Triodion and the 3 Prosomia of the Forerunner "Hail, O sacred head," Glory, Now and ever Prosomion Theotokion. "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the Triodion. At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon of the Triodion twice, and the Martyrikon once. Glory, Now and ever, Theotokion. Then "Now let your servant" and the Trisagion. Then "Theotokos Virgin" and Dismissal.
7.    On Tuesday morning after the Exapsalmos, at "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion "The head of the Forerunner arose from the earth" twice, and the Theotokion, then the Psalter. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi of the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon "There I will make the horns of David bud forth" [Psalm 132: 17, 1]. Then "Let everything that breathes" and the Gospel [Luke 7:17-30], Psalm 50 read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of your Forerunner," Now and ever, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse: "Have mercy on me, O God" and the Idiomelon "The all-holy sheath of the divine." The Canon "Having crossed the water" and the one of the Forerunner, etc. The Katavasie "I will open my mouth," with "More honorable." The Exapostilarion and the Theotokion. At the Praises: the Prosomia "He opened the fore-doors" in four, Glory, "The all-venerable head," Now and ever, "Theotokos, you are the true vine," Great Doxology, the Apolytikion; and the Hours are read, in which is said the Apolytikion "The head of the forerunner arose from the earth," and the Kontakion "O Prophet of God and Forerunner." At the Ninth Hour, the Beatitudes are sung as is the custom, as was prescribed in the Feast of Saint Charalampos, in Situation 8, Paragraph 14.
8.    In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried," we sing the Idiomelon of the day twice and the Martyrikon from the Aposticha, then the 3 Prosomia of the Triodion and the 4 of the Forerunner "Behold, the divine head," Glory, "The all-holy sheath of the divine," Now and ever the Stavrotheotokion. Entrance with the Gospel, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings {of the day from the Triodion}. Then "Let my prayer arise," the Apostolos [2nd Corinthians 4:6-15] and Gospel of the Forerunner [Matthew 11:2-15]. Then "Now the powers," Communion Hymn "In eternal memorial," "I will bless the Lord," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 409)*

=== LEAF p425 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 24: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner; Situation VII (§ 9); Situation VIII (§§ 10–11) (p. 410)]

410

Ζ΄.
9.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ, Πέμπτῃ, ἢ Παρασκευῇ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, τὴν τυπικὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους κατὰ τὴν Θ΄ καὶ ΙΑ΄ περίπτωσιν, § 12 καὶ 16.

Η΄.
10.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς αὐτῆς [Α΄] ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῆς ἡμέρας Δεῦτε πιστοὶ ἐπεργασώμεθα δίς, τοῦ Προδρόμου Προσόμοια δ΄ καὶ δ΄ τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου, Δόξα, Ὀργάνῳ χρησάμενος, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου, Εἴσοδος μετὰ θυμιατοῦ, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, Νῦν αἱ δυνάμεις, Κοινωνικὸν Γεύσασθε καὶ ἴδετε, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
11.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν καὶ τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Προδρόμου, τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Καθίσματα ἀμφοτέρων τῶν Ἁγίων μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων αὐτῶν, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τῶν Ἀναβαθμῶν τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἐκεῖ ἐξανατελῶ κέρας τῷ Δαβίδ, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ σοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἡ τῶν θείων ἐννοιῶν, Κανόνες ὁ α΄ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου, ἀπὸ γ΄ ᾨδῆς μετὰ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸν Οἶκον τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὰ τοῦ Μηναίου καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου Καθίσματα μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ Προδρόμου, τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τοῦ Προδρόμου Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτοκίον, Δοξολογία Μ. τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 410)*

=== LEAF p426 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 24: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner; Situation Seven (§ 9); Situation Eight (§§ 10–11) (p. 411)]

411

SITUATION SEVEN
9.    If the Feast occurs on Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday of this week, see the Feast of Saint Charalampos, Situations 9 and 11, Paragraphs 12 and 16 for the order of the Service.

SITUATION EIGHT
10.    If the Feast occurs on Saturday of this [the 9th] week, on Friday morning after the Introductory Psalm at "Lord, I have cried," we sing the Idiomelon of the day "Come, you faithful" twice, the 4 Prosomia of the Forerunner, and the 4 of Saint Theodore," Glory, "Using as his tool the Apostate Emperor," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the occurring Mode. Entrance with the censer. "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the Triodion. Then "Let my prayer arise," "Now the powers," Communion Hymn "Taste and see," "I will bless the Lord," and Dismissal.
11.    On Saturday in Matins, after the Midnight Service and the Exapsalmos, at "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia of the Forerunner, of Saint Theodore and the Theotokion. Kathismata of both Saints with their Theotokia, the Anavathmi of the First Antiphon of Mode IV, then the Prokimenon "There I will make the horn of David bud forth" [Psalm 132: 17, 1]. Then "Let everything that breathes" and the Gospel [Luke 7:17-30], Psalm 50 read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of your Forerunner," Now and ever, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "Have mercy on me, O God" and the Idiomelon "The all-holy sheath of the divine." Canons: the first one of the Triodion and the one of the Forerunner. After the 3rd Ode, after the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forerunner, the Kathismata of the Mineon and Triodion along with their Theotokia; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, the Minologion of the Forerunner and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "I will open my mouth," with "More honorable." The Exapostilaria: of the Forerunner, of Saint Theodore and the Theotokion. At the Praises: the 3 Prosomia of the Forerunner and the 3 of Saint Theodore, Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever the Theotokion, Great Doxology, the Apolytikion of the Forerunner and immediately the Liturgy of Chrysostom. Kontakion "Protection of Christians," Apostolos of the Triodion and Gospel of the Forerunner, Communion Hymn "In eternal memorial," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 411)*

=== LEAF p427 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 24: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner; Situation IX (§ 12); Situation X (§§ 13–14) (p. 412)]

412

Θ΄.
12.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Α΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν², τὴν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους ἑορτῇ ἐν περιπτώσει ΙΓ΄ § 23-25.

Ι΄.
13.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Β΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Προδρόμου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου Ἡ τῶν θείων ἐννοιῶν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὢ θαύματος καινοῦ, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προδρόμου, τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
14.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὰ Κατανυκτικὰ Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν καὶ τὸ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου Γρηγορίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ ᾨδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Προδρόμου, τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Προδρόμου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου Γρηγορίου β΄, Δόξα, Τοῖς ἐν σκότει ἁμαρτημάτων, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

_________________
2.    Τὸ τοῦ Κωνσταντίνου Τυπικὸν μετατίθησι τὴν ἑορτὴν τοῦ Προδρόμου τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Β΄ ἑβδομάδος, ἤτοι τῇ Α΄ ἢ τῇ Β΄ τοῦ Μαρτίου.

*(Printed Page 412)*

=== LEAF p428 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 24: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner; Situation Nine (§ 12); Situation Ten (§§ 13–14) (p. 413)]

413

SITUATION NINE
12.    If the Feast occurs on the First Sunday of Lent², see the Feast of Saint Charalampos, Situation 13, Paragraphs 23 - 25 for the Order of Service.

SITUATION TEN
13.    If the Feast occurs on the Second Sunday of Lent, Saturday at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the Reading from the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Forerunner and 3 of Saint Gregory, Glory of the Triodion Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Forerunner "The all-holy sheath of the divine," Now and ever, "O wondrous event," Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner, of Saint Gregory, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
14.    Sunday, at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Penitential "Have mercy on us" and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and the third Stasis [Stichologia] of the Forerunner with the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner and of Saint Gregory. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the Triodion, of the Forerunner and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion and the Minologion of the Forerunner and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Matins Gospel as on a Sunday of the Triodion; then "More honorable." The Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, of the Forerunner, of Saint Gregory, and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Forerunner and two of Saint Gregory; Glory, "In the darkness of sins," Now and ever, "Most blessed are you," Great Doxology, and "Today salvation."

_________________
2.    The Typikon of Constantine transfers the Feast of the Forerunner to the Saturday of the 2nd Week, that is, to either the 1st or 2nd of March.

*(Printed Page 413)*

=== LEAF p429 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 24: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner; Situation X Concl. (§ 15); Situation XI (§§ 16–17); Occurrence Envelope (p. 414)]

414

15.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προδρόμου, τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΙΑ΄.
16.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, ψάλλομεν στιχηρὰ Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Σταυροῦ γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ συμμαχήσας Κύριε, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Σῶσον Κύριε. Τῷ πρωῒ εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, Καθίσματα ἀναστάσιμα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τοῦ Προδρόμου μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων· εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν, τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Ἐν Παραδείσῳ· εἶτα ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς μετὰ τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸν Οἶκον, Καθίσματα τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τοῦ Προδρόμου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Σταυροῦ δ΄. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Σῶσον Κύριε τὸν λαόν σου, τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ καθεξῆς· Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Κοινωνικὸν Ἐσημειώθη κτλ.

17.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Β΄ ἑβδομάδος ἢ τῆς Γ΄ ἢ τῆς Δ΄, τὴν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους, περίπτωσιν ΙΔ΄ § 26, 27, καὶ ἐν πάσαις ταῖς λοιπαῖς περιπτώσεσι τὴν διάταξιν τῆς ἀκολουθίας ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους.
Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ ἑορτὴ αὕτη δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Πέμπτης τῆς τοῦ Ἀσώτου ἑβδομάδος, μέχρι τῆς Τρίτης τῆς Δ΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν, ὡς ὁρᾶται ἐν τῷ τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακι.

*(Printed Page 414)*

=== LEAF p430 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 24: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner; Situation Ten Concl. (§ 15); Situation Eleven (§§ 16–17); Occurrence Envelope (p. 415)]

415

15.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes of the Mode in 4 and 4 from the sixth Ode of the Canon of the Triodion. Apolytikia after the Entrance: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner, of Saint Gregory, of the Saint of the Church, and Kontakion "To the champion general." Apostolos of the Forerunner and Gospel of the Sunday and then the Liturgy of Saint Basil. Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

SITUATION ELEVEN
16.    If the Feast occurs on the Third Sunday of Lent, Saturday at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the Reading from the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Cross and 3 of the Forerunner, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever of the Triodion "O Lord, who helped gentle David." Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner and "Save, O Lord, Your people" and Dismissal. In the morning at "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers. At the Kathismata, 1 of the Resurrection, 1 of the Forerunner, and the Theotokion. Then the third Stasis [Stichologia] of the Forerunner and the "In Paradise of old"; then the Canon of the Triodion and of the Forerunner. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathismata of the Forerunner and of the Triodion. The Exapostilaria of the Resurrection, the Triodion, the Forerunner and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Cross. At the Liturgy, Apolytikia after the Entrance: that of the Resurrection, "Save, O Lord, Your people," that of the Forerunner, that of the Saint of the Church, and so on. Apostolos of the Forerunner and Gospel of the Sunday. Communion Hymn "The Light of Your countenance," etc.

17.    If the Feast occurs on Monday of the 2nd, 3rd or 4th Week, see the Feast of Saint Charalampos, Situation 14, Paragraphs 26 and 27 for the order of service. For all the other situations, see the Feast of Saint Charalampos for the order of service.
Note that this Feast may occur within the Triodion period from the Thursday of the week of the Prodigal Son until Tuesday of the Fourth Week of Lent, as may be seen in the Festal Chart.

*(Printed Page 415)*
