=== LEAF p381 ===
[Original Greek Text: Feast of the Meeting of our Lord Jesus Christ (Hypapante); Matins Ode 9 Megalynaria (p. 366)]

366

’Αγγέλοις καὶ βροτοῖς, Μητροπάρθενε ἁγνή.
	’Αγκαλίζεται χερσίν, ὁ Πρεσβύτης Συμεών, τὸν τοῦ νόμου Ποιητήν, καὶ Δεσπότην τοῦ παντός.
	Βουληθεὶς ὁ Πλαστουργός, ἵνα σώσῃ τὸν ’Αδάμ, μήτραν ᾤκησε τὴν σήν, τῆς Παρθένου καὶ ἁγνῆς.
	Γένος ἅπαν τῶν βροτῶν, μακαρίζει σε Ἁγνή, καὶ δοξάζει σε πιστῶς, ὡς Μητέρα τοῦ Θεοῦ.
	Δεῦτε ἴδετε Χριστόν, τὸν Δεσπότην τοῦ παντός, ὃν βαστάζει Συμεών, σήμερον ἐν τῷ ναῷ.
	Ἐπιβλέπεις πρὸς τὴν γῆν, καὶ ποιεῖς τρέμειν αὐτήν, καὶ πῶς γέρων κεκμηκώς, σὲ κατέχει ἐν χερσί;
	Ζήσας ἔτη Συμεών, ἕως εἶδε τὸν Χριστόν, καὶ ἐβόα πρὸς αὐτόν· Νῦν ἀπόλυσιν ζητῶ.
	Ἡ λαβὶς ἡ μυστική, ἡ τὸν ἄνθρακα Χριστόν, συλλαβοῦσα ἐν γαστρί, σὺ ὑπάρχεις Μαριάμ.
	Θέλων ἐνηνθρώπησας, ὁ προάναρχος Θεός, καὶ ναῷ προσφέρεσαι, τεσσαρακονθήμερος.
	Κατελθόντ’ ἐξ οὐρανοῦ, τὸν Δεσπότην τοῦ παντός, ὑπεδέξατο αὐτόν, Συμεὼν ὁ Ἱερεύς.
	Καὶ τὰ τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδῆς δ΄ Τροπάρια εἰς ς΄ μετὰ τῶν ὑπολειπομένων Μεγαλυναρίων.
	Λάμπρυνόν μου τὴν ψυχήν, καὶ τὸ φῶς τὸ αἰσθητόν, ὅπως ἴδω καθαρῶς, καὶ κηρύξω σε Θεόν. (. . . Ἐν νόμῳ σκιᾷ . . .)
	Μητροπάρθενε ἁγνή, τί προσφέρεις τῷ ναῷ, νέον βρέφος ἀποδούς, ἐν ἀγκάλαις Συμεών; (. . . Ἐν νόμῳ σκιᾷ . . .)
	Νῦν ἀπόλυσιν ζητῶ, ἀπὸ σοῦ τοῦ Πλαστουργοῦ, ὅτι εἶδόν σε Χριστέ, τὸ σωτήριόν μου φῶς. (. . . Τοῖς πρὶν νεογνῶν . . .)
	Ὃν οἱ ἄνω λειτουργοί, τρόμῳ λιτανεύουσι, κάτω νῦν ὁ Συμεών, ἀγκαλίζεται χερσί. (. . . Τοῖς πρὶν νεογνῶν . . .)

	Δόξα, Ἡ τῇ φύσει μὲν μονάς, τοῖς προσώποις δὲ Τριάς, φύλαττε τοὺς δούλους σου, τοὺς πιστεύοντας εἰς σέ. (. . . Ἀπέδωκάς μοι . . .)
	Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπίς, πάντων τῶν Χριστιανῶν, σκέπε φρούρει φύλαττε, τοὺς ἐλπίζοντας εἰς σέ. (. . . Ἱεροπρεπῶς ἀνθωμολογεῖτο, . . .)

*(Printed Page 366)*

=== LEAF p382 ===
[English Facing Translation: Feast of the Meeting of our Lord Jesus Christ (Hypapante); Matins Ode 9 Megalynaria (p. 367)]

367

angels and mortal men, O pure Virgin Mother.
Symeon the Elder takes in his arms the Maker of the Law and Master of all.
The Creator, wishing to save Adam, took up His dwelling in your pure and virgin womb.
All mankind blesses you, O pure Virgin, and in faith glorifies you as Mother of God.
Come and behold Christ the master of all, whom Symeon carries today in the temple.
You do look down upon the earth and make it tremble: how then can I, aged and weary, hold You in mine arms?
Symeon had lived for many years when he beheld Christ and cried aloud to Him: 'Now do I seek my release.'
Mary, you are the mystic Tongs, who has conceived in your womb Christ the live Coal.
O God, who was before all things begun, of your own will You have become man and are carried, a child forty days old, into the temple.
Symeon the priest received the Lord of all, come down from heaven.
And the 4 Hymns of the 9th Ode in 6 with the following remaining Megalynaria:
Illumine my soul and the light of my senses, that I may see You in purity: and I will proclaim that you are God. {. . . In the shadow.}
O pure Virgin Mother, why do You bring into the temple a newborn babe and commit Him into the hands of Symeon? {. . . In the shadow.}
'From You, the Creator, I now seek release: for I have seen You, O Christ, my Salvation and my Light.' {. . . A pair of newly born turtle doves.}
Him whom the Ministers at the Liturgy on high entreat with trembling, here below Symeon now takes in his arms. {. . . A pair of newly born turtle doves.}
Glory [to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.] O You by nature One but in persons Three, watch over Your servants who put their faith in You. . . {You have given me exceeding joy.}
Now and ever, [and unto ages of ages. Amen.] O Theotokos, the Hope of all Christians, protect, watch over, and guide all those who put their hope in you {. . . Soberly Anna confessed God.}

*(Printed Page 367)*

=== LEAF p383 ===
[Original Greek Text: Feast of the Meeting of our Lord; Matins Conclusion; Divine Liturgy: § 3 Antiphons 1–2 (p. 368)]

368

Τὴν Καταβασίαν Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπίς. . . Ἐν νόμῳ, σκιᾷ. τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ἐν πνεύματι τῷ Ἱερῷ ἐκ γ΄. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια Νόμον τὸν ἐν γράμματι. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ἐν χερσὶ πρεσβυτικαῖς, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα·

Ἀντίφωνον α΄

Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία μου λόγον ἀγαθόν. | Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου, κτλ.
Ἡ γλῶσσά μου κάλαμος γραμματέως ὀξυγράφου.
Ἐξεχύθη χάρις ἐν χείλεσί σου.
Διὰ τοῦτο εὐλόγησέ σε ὁ Θεὸς εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα.

[Δόξα Πατρί, καὶ Υἱῷ, καὶ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι. Καὶ νῦν, καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.
Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου, κτλ.] (Ὅρα Προθεωρία Ἀντίφωνον Α΄, σελ. 47.)

Ἀντίφωνον β΄.

Περίζωσαι τὴν ῥομφαίαν σου ἐπὶ τὸν μηρόν σου δυνατέ. | Σῶσον ἡμᾶς...ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ Δικαίου Συμεὼν βασταχθεὶς κτλ.
Καὶ ἔντεινε, καὶ κατευοδοῦ καὶ βασίλευε.
Τὰ βέλη σου ἠκονημένα δυνατέ· λαοὶ ὑποκάτω σου πεσοῦνται.
Ῥάβδος εὐθύτητος ἡ ῥάβδος τῆς βασιλείας σου.

[Δόξα Πατρί, καὶ Υἱῷ, καὶ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι. Καὶ νῦν, καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.]
Ὁ Μονογενὴς . . .]

*(Printed Page 368)*

=== LEAF p384 ===
[English Facing Translation: Feast of the Meeting of our Lord; Matins Conclusion; Divine Liturgy: § 3 Antiphons 1–2 (p. 369)]

369

The Katavasia "O Theotokos, the Hope . . . In the shadow." The Exapostilarion "The Elder, brought to the temple by the Spirit," 3 times. At the Praises: the Prosomia "Fulfilling the written Law." Glory, Now and ever, "O Christ our God, who has been pleased to rest this day in the arms of the Elder." Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.
3. In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

FIRST ANTIPHON

My heart overflows with a goodly theme; I address my verses to the King. (Psalm 44:1) | Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, etc.
My tongue is like the pen of a ready scribe. (Psalm 44:1)
Grace is poured out upon your lips. (Psalm 44:2)
Therefore God has blessed you forever. (Psalm 44:2)

[Glory to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, [Savior, save us!][See the Protheoria, First Antiphon, page 47.}

SECOND ANTIPHON

Gird your sword on your thigh, O Mighty One, in your Glory. | O Son of God, who were carried in the arms of Symeon the Just, save us who sing to You, Alleluia!
Bend Your bow, and prosper, and reign. (Psalm 44:3)
Your arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's enemies; the peoples fall under you. (Psalm 44:5)
Your royal scepter is a scepter of equity. (Psalm 44:6)

[Glory to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
Only-begotten Son and Word of God]

*(Printed Page 369)*

=== LEAF p385 ===
[Original Greek Text: Feast of the Meeting; Liturgy: § 3 Antiphon 3 – Dismissal; Concurrence on Sunday outside Triodion: § 4 – § 5 incipit (p. 370)]

370

Ἀντίφωνον γ΄.

Ἄκουσον θύγατερ, καὶ ἴδε, καὶ κλῖνον τὸ οὖς σου. | Χαῖρε κεχαριτωμένη κτλ.
Τὸ πρόσωπόν σου λιτανεύσουσιν οἱ πλούσιοι τοῦ λαοῦ.
Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός σου ἐν πάσῃ γενεᾷ καὶ γενεᾷ.

Τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐγνώρισε Κύριος τὸ Σωτήριον αὐτοῦ ἐναντίον πάντων τῶν ἐθνῶν. Σῶσον ἡμᾶς, Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ Δικαίου Συμεὼν βασταχθείς, [ψάλλοντάς Σοι, Ἀλληλούϊα.] Τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Χαῖρε κεχαριτωμένη, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπὶς . . . Ἐν νόμῳ, σκιᾷ κτλ. Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Κυριακῇ ἔξω τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἕξ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνοιγέσθω ἡ πύλη, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ τοῖς Χερουβὶμ ἐποχούμενος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς δὶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις (Ἴδε ταύτην ὄπισθεν ἐν § 6).

5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, τὸ δὲ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας ψάλλεται δίς, εἶτα ἡ Αἴτησις, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου (τὸ Τυπικὸν ἔχει τὴν κανονικὴν τάξιν ἀντιστρόφως, δηλ. Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ Ὑπακοή. Αὐτὸ πρέπει νὰ εἶναι τυπογραφικὸν λάθος διότι ἡ §12, δίχνει τὴν κανονικὴν σειράν, ἤτοι πρῶτον ἡ Ὑπακοὴ καὶ κατόπιν οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί) καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἑορτῆς Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός σου, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν

*(Printed Page 370)*

=== LEAF p386 ===
[English Facing Translation: Feast of the Meeting; Liturgy: § 3 Antiphon 3 – Dismissal; Concurrence on Sunday outside Triodion: § 4 – § 5 incipit (p. 371)]

371

THIRD ANTIPHON

Hear, O daughter, and consider and incline your ear; (Psalm 44:11) | Hail, O Woman full of grace, etc.
The rich among the people seek your favors. (Psalm 44:12)
I will cause your name to be celebrated in all generations. (Psalm 44:17)

The Entrance Hymn "The Lord has made known his victory; he has revealed his vindication in the sight of the nations. Save us, O Son of God, who were carried in the arms of Symeon the Just, [who sing to You, Alleluia!"J The Apolytikion "Hail, O Woman full of grace," the Kontakion "By Your birth You sanctified a virgin womb." The Trisagios Hymn; the Apostolos and the Gospel. At "Especially," "Theotokos, the Hope . . . In the shadow," Communion Hymn "I will receive the cup of salvation," "We have seen the [true] Light," and Dismissal.
4.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, outside the Triodion period, on Saturday at Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira and six of the Feast, Glory, Now and ever, "Let the gate of heaven be opened." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon, and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "He who is borne on high by the Cherubim." The Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Feast twice and the Dismissal (For the text of the Dismissal, see below, Para. 6.)
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion, then that of the Feast twice, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Feast in place of each of the Theotokia, that of the 3rd Stasis [Stichologia] is sung twice, the Petition, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode {the Typikon has the proper order reversed: i.e., Anavathmi then Ypakoi; however, this must be a typesetting error since in Paragraph 12 it has the usual order of Ypakoi then Anavathmi} and the Prokimenon of the Feast "I will remember Your name" (Psalm 44:17). Then "Let all breath" and the Gospel of the Feast, the "Having beheld the Resurrection,"

*(Printed Page 371)*

=== LEAF p387 ===
[Original Greek Text: Meeting: Sunday outside Triodion: § 5 concl. – § 6; Sunday After the Feast: § 7 – § 8 incipit (p. 372)]

372

Χριστοῦ, ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἀνοιγέσθω ἡ πύλη. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ Στίχου Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, καὶ ψάλλεται τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον καὶ ψάλλονται τὰ Μεγαλυνάρια καὶ τὰ Τροπάρια τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδῆς ὡς ἐν § 2, ἡ καταβασία Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπίς (. . . Ἐν νόμῳ, σκιᾷ.) τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα, Ὁ ἐν χερσὶ πρεσβυτικαῖς, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα ὡς ἐν § 3. Εἰς τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ Δικαίου Συμεὼν βασταχθείς, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐγνώρισε Κύριος· Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπίς (. . . Ἐν νόμῳ, σκιᾷ), Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ἡ Ἀπόλυσις Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι, ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ Δικαίου Συμεὼν βασταχθῆναι καταδεξάμενος διὰ τὴν ἡμῶν σωτηρίαν καὶ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν Χριστὸς ὁ ἀληθινὸς Θεὸς ἡμῶν κτλ.

Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὴν Ἑορτήν.

7.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄, Δόξα, Ἐρευνᾶτε τὰς Γραφὰς (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ παλαιὸς ἡμερῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. (Ἴδε ἄνωθεν §6)

8.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος

*(Printed Page 372)*

=== LEAF p388 ===
[English Facing Translation: Meeting: Sunday outside Triodion: § 5 concl. – § 6; Sunday After the Feast: § 7 – § 8 incipit (p. 373)]

373

Psalm 50 read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," Now and ever the same, the Verse "Have mercy upon me" and the Idiomelon "Let the gate of heaven be opened." The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast with the Verse "Most holy Theotokos, intercede for us." After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Kathisma of the Feast is sung once; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie "The sun once shone," the Megalynaria and the Hymns of the 9th Ode as in Paragraph 2, the Katavasia "O Theotokos, the Hope {. . . In the shadow."} The Exapostilarion of the Resurrection and that of the Feast twice. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Feast, Glory, "O Christ our God, who has been pleased to rest this day in the arms of the Elder," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
6.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons as in Paragraph 3. In the 2nd Antiphon: "O Son of God who were carried in the arms of Symeon the Just" The Entrance Hymn "The Lord has made known his victory; he has revealed his vindication in the sight of the nations. O Son of God, Who is risen from the dead, save us who sing to You, Alleluia!" The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, the Kontakion "By Your birth You sanctified a virgin womb," the Apostolos and the Gospel of the Feast. At "Especially," "O Theotokos, the Hope {. . . In the shadow,"} Communion Hymn "I will receive the cup of salvation," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal: "Glory to You, our God, glory to You. May He who for our salvation was carried in the arms of Symeon the Just, and rose from the dead, Christ our true God" etc,.

Sunday After the Feast

7.    On Saturday at Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 6 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Post-feast, Glory, "Search the Scriptures" (seek in the Liti), Now and ever the First Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "The ancient of days." The Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and Dismissal {See above Paragraph 6}.

8.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion twice and

*(Printed Page 373)*

=== LEAF p389 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday After the Feast: § 8 concl. – § 9; Apodosis of the Feast: § 10; Situation II: § 11 (p. 374)]

374

τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν· Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄· Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινὸν Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

9.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὰ {τὸ} τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν· Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς Ἑορτῆς.

10.    Τῇ Θ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ ψάλλονται ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐξαιροῦνται ὅμως ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα καὶ ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ ἡ Λιτή, ὁ Πολυέλεος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· ἐν δὲ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τὰ τῆς ἡμέρας.

Β΄

11.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ Τριῳδίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄ (ἐν τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω καὶ τῆς Τυρινῆς Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄), Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ

¹ Σημειοῦμεν χάριν τῶν φιλοπεριέργων ὅτι οὐδέποτε ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς ταύτης συμπίπτει ἐν Κυριακῇ ἄνευ Τριῳδίου· διὸ καὶ οὐδὲ μνείαν τοιαύτης περιπτώσεως ποιούμεθα.

*(Printed Page 374)*

=== LEAF p390 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday After the Feast: § 8 concl. – § 9; Apodosis of the Feast: § 10; Situation II: § 11 (p. 375)]

375

of the Feast once, the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Feast's in place of each of the Theotokia, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection and the Minologion. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then we chant "More honorable." The Exapostilaria of the Resurrection and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Post-feast, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

9.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, 4 Hymns of the Mode and 4 from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, those {that} of the Feast, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "By Your birth You sanctified a virgin womb"; the Apostolos and the Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal:

The Leave-taking of the Feast.

10.    On the 9th of the month the Leave-taking of the Feast takes place and all the office of the Feast is performed, omitting the Readings at Vespers; the Liti, the Polyeleos, and the Gospel at Matins. In the Liturgy, the Apostolos and Gospel of the day are recited.¹

SITUATION TWO

11.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday within the Triodion period, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 2 of the Triodion and 4 of the Feast (on the Sunday of Meatfare and Cheesefare 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Feast), Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever of the Feast, Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection

1. We note for the benefit of the curious that the Leave-taking of this Feast never occurs on a Sunday outside the Triodion period; for this reason we did not prescribe any such situations.

*(Printed Page 375)*
