=== LEAF p161 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Sunday Service — Elevation, Communion, Thanksgiving, Ambo Prayer, Dismissal (p. 146)]

146

Πάντων τῶν ἁγίων μνημονεύσαντες κτλ. μέχρι τοῦ Τὴν ἑνότητα τῆς πίστεως· ὁ Ἱερ. ἐκφωνεῖ Καὶ καταξίωσον ἡμᾶς, Δέσποτα κτλ. ὁ Προϊστάμενος λέγει τὴν Κυριακὴν Προσευχήν, ὁ Ἱερ. τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία· εἶτα Εἰρήνη πᾶσι οἱ Χορ. Καὶ τῷ πνεύματί σου ὁ Διάκ. Τὰς κεφαλὰς ἡμῶν τῷ Κυρίῳ κλίνωμεν· [οἱ Χοροί Σύ, Κύριε] ὁ Ἱερ. Χάριτι καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς καὶ φιλανθρωπίᾳ τοῦ μονογενοῦς σου Υἱοῦ· ὁ Διάκ. ἐκφωνεῖ Πρόσχωμεν· ὁ Ἱερ. Τὰ Ἅγια τοῖς ἁγίοις· οἱ Χορ. Εἷς Ἅγιος, εἷς Κύριος, Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς εἰς δόξαν θεοῦ Πατρός, Ἀμήν· καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ Χορ. ψάλλειν μετὰ μέλους εἰς τὸν ἦχον τῆς ἡμέρας τὸ Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν, Ἀλληλούϊα, μεθ’ ὃ ὁ Διάκον. ἐμφανισθεὶς ἔμπροσθεν τῶν ἁγίων Πυλῶν μετὰ τοῦ ἱεροῦ Ποτηρίου, ἐκφωνεῖ· Μετὰ φόβου θεοῦ πίστεως καὶ ἀγάπης προσέλθετε· ὁ Ἱερεὺς εὐλογῶν τὸν λαὸν ἐκφωνεῖ Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν σου· καὶ ὁ α΄ Χορ. ψάλλει εἰς ἦχον β΄ τὸ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν· ὁ Ἱερεὺς λαβὼν καὶ ὑψῶν τὸ Ἱερὸν Ποτήριον. λέγει ταπεινῇ τῇ φωνῇ ἐπὶ τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης, Εὐλογητὸς ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν εἶτα στρέφων πρὸς τὸν λαὸν λέγει ἐκφώνως· Πάντοτε νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων· ὁ Χορ. Ἀμήν, καὶ ὁ Διάκον. Ὀρθοὶ μεταλαβόντες τῶν θείων ἁγίων, καὶ ὁ Ἱερ. τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν, Ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ ἁγιασμὸς ἡμῶν· ὁ Διάκ. Ἐν εἰρήνῃ προέλθωμεν· τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν· ὁ Χορὸς* Κύριε ἐλέησον τρίς· ὁ Ἱερεὺς τὴν ὀπισθάμβωνον εὐχὴν Ὁ εὐλογῶν τοὺς εὐλογοῦντάς σε, Κύριε· μετὰ τὴν εὐχὴν οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι τρὶς χῦμα, ἀλλ’ εὐλαβῶς, εἰς ἦχον β΄ τὸ Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου εὐλογημένον ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν καὶ ἕως τοῦ αἰῶνος· εἶτα ὁ Διάκον. Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν· ὁ Χορὸς* Κύριε ἐλέησον τρίς· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Εὐλογία Κυρίου καὶ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ ἔλθοι ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς ὁ Προϊστάμενος λέγει τὸ Στερεώσαι Κύριος, ὡς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, ὁ Ἱερεὺς πάλιν Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός· ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν κτλ. εἰς τὸ τέλος Δι’ εὐχῶν τῶν ἁγίων Πατέρων ἡμῶν οἱ Χοροὶ Ἀμήν, καὶ ἀσπασάμενοι πάντες τὴν τοῦ ἱερουργοῦντος χεῖρα καὶ λαβόντες σὺν τῷ ἀντιδώρῳ τὴν εὐλογίαν αὐτοῦ, ἐξέρχονται εὐχαριστοῦντες τῷ Θεῷ.

*(Printed Page 146)*

=== LEAF p162 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Sunday Service — Elevation, Communion, Thanksgiving, Ambo Prayer, Dismissal (p. 147)]

147

the Deacon: "Having remembered all the saints prayed for the unity of the faith", the Priest: "And make us worthy, Master...", the Proistamenos recites the Lord's Prayer, the Priest: "For Yours is the kingdom"; then: "Peace be with all"; the Choirs: "And with your spirit"; the Deacon: "Let us bow our heads to the Lord"; [the Choirs: "To You, Lord."] The Priest: By the grace, mercy, and love for us of Your only-begotten"; the Deacon: "Let us be attentive"; the Priest: "The holy Gifts for the holy people of God"; the Choirs: "One is Holy, one is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen"; and the Second Choir sings the Communion Hymn "Praise the Lord from the heavens, Alleluia" with melody in the Mode of the day. After this, the Deacon, appearing before the Royal Gate with the Holy Chalice, exclaims "Approach with the fear of God, faith, and love"; the Priest, blessing the people, exclaims "Save, O God, Your people"; and the First Choir sings "We have seen the true light..." in Mode II; the Priest lifts the Holy Chalice and says in a low voice "Blessed is our God"; then turning toward the people says aloud: "Always, now and forever and to the ages of ages"; the Choir: "Amen"; the Deacon: "Let us be attentive. Having partaken of the divine holy..."; and the Priest chants the Exclamation "For You are our sanctification"; the Deacon: "Let us depart in peace. Let us pray to the Lord"; the Choir:* "Lord, have mercy" 3 times; the Priest recites the Prayer behind the Ambo [Pulpit]: "Lord, bless those who bless You." After this prayer, the Choirs recite three times, in recitative style, reverently, in Mode II: "Blessed is the name of the Lord, both now and to the ages." Then the Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord"; the Choir:* "Lord have mercy" 3 times; the Priest: "May the blessing of the Lord and His mercy come upon you"; the Proistamenos says "Make firm, O Christ God," as in Vespers; the Priest again: "Glory to You, O God, Who are risen from the dead," etc. At the end: "Through the prayers of our holy Fathers"; the Choirs: "Amen." And, all kissing the hand of the celebrating Priest and receiving together with the antidoron his blessing, exit, giving thanks to God.

*(Printed Page 147)*

=== LEAF p163 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 1: Beginning of the Indiction, St. Simeon Stylites, Miasena Icon — Vespers (p. 148)]

148

ΤΥΠΙΚΗ ΔΙΑΤΑΞΙΣ

ΤΗΣ ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΙΑΣ

ΤΟΥ ΕΣΠΕΡΙΝΟΥ, ΤΟΥ ΟΡΘΡΟΥ ΚΑΙ ΤΗΣ
ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑΣ

ΤΩΝ ΚΑΤΑ ΜΗΝΑ
ΔΕΣΠΟΤΙΚΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΘΕΟΜΗΤΟΡΙΚΩΝ
ΕΟΡΤΩΝ

ΚΑΙ ΤΩΝ ΕΟΡΤΑΖΟΜΕΝΩΝ ΑΓΙΩΝ

ΜΗΝ ΣΕΠΤΕΜΒΡΙΟΣ

Τῇ Α΄. Ἀρχὴ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, ἤτοι τοῦ νέου ἔτους καὶ μνήμη τοῦ Ὁσίου Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Συμεὼν τοῦ Στυλίτου, καὶ ἡ Σύναξις τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου τῶν Μιασηνῶν.

1. Εἰ τύχοι ἡ α΄ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν Α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια τῆς Ἰνδίκτου γ΄, τοῦ Ὁσίου Προσόμοια γ΄ Ὅσιε Πάτερ, καὶ ἕτερα Ἰδιόμελα δ΄ Ἐκ ῥίζης ἀγαθῆς, Δόξα Θεία χάρις, Καὶ νῦν [Ὁ] Πνεύματι Ἁγίῳ, Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ δ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, Δόξα Ὅσιε Πάτερ, Καὶ νῦν Σὺ Βασιλεῦ, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια τῆς Ἰνδίκτου Ὁ πάσης δημιουργός, τοῦ Ὁσίου Ὑπομονῆς στῦλος, τῆς Θεοτόκου Χαῖρε κεχαριτωμένη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 148)*

=== LEAF p164 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 1: Beginning of the Indiction, St. Simeon Stylites, Miasena Icon — Vespers (p. 149)]

149

ORDER

OF THE SERVICE

OF VESPERS, MATINS AND DIVINE LITURGY

OF THE FEASTS OF THE LORD, THE THEOTOKOS

AND OF THE CELEBRATED SAINTS
PRESENTED BY MONTH

MONTH OF SEPTEMBER

The 1st. Beginning of the Indiction that is, of the New Year; Commemoration of our Holy Father Simeon the Stylite and the Synaxis of the Most Holy Mother of God, [venerated in her icon] of Miasine.

1. If September 1, the Feast of the Indiction, occurs on any other day except Sunday, in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the 1st Stasis of the Psalter at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 3 Stichira Prosomia of the Indiction, 3 Stichira Prosomia of the Saint "Righteous Father" and 4 other Idiomela "From a good root," Glory, "Divine grace," Now and ever, "Holy Spirit." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 4 Idiomela of the Indiction, Glory, "Righteous Father," Now and ever, "You King." The Apolytikia: of the Indiction "Maker of the Universe," of the Saint "You became a pillar of endurance" and of the Theotokos "Hail, O Woman full of grace," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 149)*

=== LEAF p165 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 1: Indiction Weekday Matins & Liturgy; Sunday Vespers & Matins Enarxis (p. 150)]

150

2. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ Ψαλμὸν τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἰνδίκτου καὶ ὁ ἑξάψαλμος, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια, ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα καὶ οἱ Κανόνες, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, ἀφ’ ς΄ Τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ τῶν αἰώνων ποιητὴς καὶ δεσπότης, ὁ Οἶκος Ἀρρήτῳ, πάντα ὡς Θεῷ ποιήσαντι σοφίᾳ καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας, Τὴν Τιμιωτέραν καὶ τὰ γ΄ Ἐξαποστειλάρια. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ δ΄ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα τοῦ Ὁσίου Ἐκ ῥίζης ἀγαθῆς, Καὶ νῦν τῆς Ἰνδίκτου Ὁ ἀρρήτῳ Σοφίᾳ, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἰνδίκτου.

3. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικά, οἱ Μακαρισμοί· Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ἰνδίκτου μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, τὸ Χαῖρε κεχαριτωμένη, τὸ τοῦ Ὁσίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ τῶν αἰώνων ποιητὴς καὶ δεσπότης· Τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Ἰνδίκτου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εὐλόγησον τὸν στέφανον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

4. Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ α΄ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῆς Ἰνδίκτου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου γ΄ τὰ Ὅσιε πάτερ· Δόξα τῆς Ἰνδίκτου Ὁ πνεύματι ἁγίῳ, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Ὅσιε Πάτερ, Καὶ νῦν Σὺ βασιλεῦ· Ἀπολυτίκια τοῦ Ὁσίου, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, τῆς θεοτόκου Χαῖρε κεχαριτωμένη, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.*

5. Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν εἶτα, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἰνδίκτου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν καὶ τὸ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου Ὁ καιροὺς καρποφόρους δίς, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα, καὶ τὸ τελευταῖον Κάθισμα τῆς Ἰνδίκτου Ὡς δεσπότῃ τοῦ παντὸς ἅπαξ· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος

*(Printed Page 150)*

=== LEAF p166 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 1: Indiction Weekday Matins & Liturgy; Sunday Vespers & Matins Enarxis (p. 151)]

151

2. In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Indiction and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter, the Kathismata in order, Psalm 50 (read) and the Canons. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Righteous Saint and the Indiction; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion "O Creator and master of time," the Ikos "Ineffably, as God you created all in wisdom" and the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie "Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross," then "More honorable," and the 3 Exapostilaria. At the Praises: the 4 Idiomela of the Indiction, Glory of the Righteous Saint "From a good root," Now and ever of the Indiction "With ineffable wisdom," Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Indiction.

3. In the Liturgy, the Typika, the Beatitudes; Hymns from the 3rd and 6th Ode of the Canon of the Indiction. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the Indiction "Hail, O Woman full of grace," that of the Righteous Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "O Creator and master of time"; the Trisagios Hymn, Apostolos and Gospel of the Indiction. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "O Lord, bless the year with your bounty!"; "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

4. If September 1 occurs on Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the 1st Stasis of the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 Prosomia Hymns of the Indiction, and 3 Prosomia Hymns of the Saint "Righteous Father," Glory, "Through the Holy Spirit," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "Righteous Father," Now and ever, "You King." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Indiction "Maker of the Universe," Glory of the Righteous One "You became a pillar of endurance," Now and ever of the Theotokos "Hail, O Woman full of grace," and Dismissal.*

5. On Sunday; at Matins after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic "It is meet"; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Indiction and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and that of the Indiction "He with the fruit bearing seasons" twice, the EvlogitFound, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Indiction with the Verse "Glory to You, O God." After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos (read,) and the last Kathisma of the Indiction "As master of all" once; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Indiction and the Minologion of the Saints of the

*(Printed Page 151)*

=== LEAF p167 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 1 (cont.): Sunday Matins & Liturgy; September 6: Miracle of Archangel Michael at Chonae (p. 152)]

152

τὰ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας· αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου τὰ τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ Τῆς αὐτολέκτου καὶ θείας εἰς δ΄ Δόξα Ὁ ἀρρήτῳ σοφίᾳ, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

6. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ἰνδίκτου δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, τὸ Χαῖρε κεχαριτωμένη, τὸ τοῦ Ὁσίου, καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Ἰνδίκτου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν. Κοινωνικὸν τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Εἰ τύχοι τῆς Ἰνδίκτου ἐν Σαββάτῳ, τῇ ἐλευσομένῃ Κυριακῇ ἤτοι τῇ ζ΄ [ὀρθότερον τῇ η΄] τοῦ μηνὸς Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τὰ τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως.

Τῇ ς΄. Τὸ ἐν Χώναις θαῦμα τοῦ Ἀρχιστρατήγου Μιχαήλ.

1. Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου δ΄. Δόξα Συγχάρητε ἡμῖν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου· Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Ὡς ταξιάρχης καὶ πρόμαχος, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου, Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2. Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὴν συνήθη Ἀκολουθίαν, τῆς Κυριακῆς οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. Σήμερον Σωτηρία καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 152)*

=== LEAF p168 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 1 (cont.): Sunday Matins & Liturgy; September 6: Miracle of Archangel Michael at Chonae (p. 153)]

153

day. The Katavasie "Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then, sung by verse, the "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Righteous Saint, and of the Indiction. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and {the 4 Idiomela} of the Indiction from Vespers "The self-proclaimed and divine." Glory, "With ineffable wisdom," Now and ever, "Most blessed." Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

6. In the Liturgy, the Typika, and Beatitudes of the Mode in four and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Indiction. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Indiction, the "Hail O Woman full of grace," that of the Righteous Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion of the Indiction. Apostolos and Gospel of the Indiction. At "Especially," "It is meet"; Communion Hymn of the Indiction, "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
    If the Indiction occurs on a Saturday, on the following Sunday, that is, on the 7th {more correctly the 8th} of the month, the Apostolos and Gospel are those of the Sunday before the Elevation.

The 6th. The Miracle Performed by the Archangel Michael at Chone.

1. If the Feast [September 6] occurs on a Sunday, then on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at Lord, I have cried we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 Prosomia Hymns of the Archangel. Glory, "Rejoice with us," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "As leader and champion." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Archangel, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.

2. On Sunday, at Matins after the usual Service of Sunday, both Canons, the Katavasie "Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel, then "More honorable." The Exapostilarion of the Resurrection, that of the Archangel and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Archangel, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation." Then follows the Liturgy, Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday, Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 153)*

=== LEAF p169 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 7: Forefeast of the Nativity of the Theotokos & St. Sozon (p. 154)]

154

Τῇ Ζ΄. Τὰ Προεόρτια τῆς Γεννήσεως τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Μάρτυρος Σώζοντος.

1. Ἄν τύχωσι τὰ Προεόρτια ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ Προεόρτια δ΄, Δόξα Τὴν πάνσεπτόν σου Γέννησιν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Ἡ Παγκόσμιος χαρά, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης Ἰεσσαί, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    (Σημ. Ἡ δὲ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου ψάλλεται ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις· εἴ που δὲ ἑορτάζεται ὁ Ἅγιος, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, Προεόρτια γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Καὶ νῦν τὸ Προεόρτιον, λέγεται δὲ καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἀπολυτίκιον).

2. Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Τεχθεῖσα παραδόξως, εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν αὖθις Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Τὰ οὐράνια πάντα, εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος, οὗ ὁ στίχος Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα Ἀγαλλιάσθω οὐρανὸς ἅπαξ· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἀγάλλου κτίσις ἅπασα. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ Προεόρτια δ΄ Δεῦτε οἱ ἐξ Ἀδάμ, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

3. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ προεορτίου Κανόνος· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον καὶ τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Προεόρτιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον καὶ θεοτόκος Μαρία (ζήτει ἀφ’ ς΄ Ὠδῆς). Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως· εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,

*(Printed Page 154)*

=== LEAF p170 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 7: Forefeast of the Nativity of the Theotokos & St. Sozon (p. 155)]

155

The 7th. The Pre-feast of the Birth of the All-Holy Theotokos, and the Holy Martyr Sozon.

1. If September 7 (the Pre-feast) occurs on Sunday, on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Pre-feast, Glory, "Your all-holy birth," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, O Gladsome Light and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "The universal joy." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, and of the Pre-feast "From the root of Jesse," and Dismissal.
    (Note: The Service of the Saint is sung at Compline; when, however, the Saint is celebrated, at "Lord I cried," we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Pre-feast and 3 of the Saint. At the Aposticha: Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Pre-feast; the Apolytikion of the Saint is also sung.)

2. On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic "It is meet"; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion twice and that of the Pre-feast once, the Psalter and the Amomos. Kathismata in the first section (1st Stichologia): 2 of the Resurrection, and that of the Pre-feast "Born paradoxically"; at the second section of the Kathismata: 2 of the Resurrection and that of the Pre-feast "All the heavenly things"; then the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Pre-feast, whose Verse is "Most Holy Theotokos." After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma "Rejoice, O heaven" once; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection and the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie "Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection and of the Pre-feast "Rejoice, all creation." At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and the 4 of the Pre-feast "Come you, born of Adam," Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

3. In the Liturgy, the Typika, and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Pre-feast, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion of the Pre-feast "Today the Virgin and Theotokos Mary" (look for it after the 6th Ode). Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before the Elevation. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn

*(Printed Page 155)*
