=== LEAF p821 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday of the Paralytic Concluded (§ 22) and The Wednesday of Mid-Pentecost Opening (§§ 23–24) (p. 806)]

806

τῶν β΄ Θεοτοκίων· τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ τὸ τοῦ
Παραλύτου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ Πάσχα
ἱερόν, Δόξα, Κύριε τὸν Παράλυτον, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως
ἡμέρα, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
22.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ
Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Εὐφραινέσθω τὰ
Οὐράνια, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα,
Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ὁ
Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, Συμφώνως Παρθένε¹², Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ.
Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Παραλύτου ψάλλεται μέχρι τῆς Τρίτης,
καθ᾿ ἣν καὶ ἀποδίδοται.

Τῌ ΤΕΤΑΡΤῌ ΤΗΣ ΜΕΣΟΠΕΝΤΗΚΟΣΤΗΣ

23.    Τῇ Τρίτῃ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, ὁ Προοιμιακός,
εἰς δὲ τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια Πάρεστιν ἡ μεσότης
ἡμερῶν εἰς ς΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τῆς ἑορτῆς μεσούσης. Εἴσοδος, τὸ
Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα,
τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Πεντηκοστῆς ἐφέστηκεν, Στίχοι Μνήσθητι τῆς
συναγωγῆς σου ἧς ἐκτήσω ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς, καὶ Ὁ δὲ Θεὸς Βασιλεὺς ἡμῶν
πρὸ αἰώνων εἰργάσατο σωτηρίαν ἐν μέσῳ τῆς γῆς. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Μεσούσης τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ γ΄ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

24.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, ἐκ γ΄, τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἶτα τὰ δύο Καθίσματα τῆς α΄
καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίας ἐκ β΄, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς
χῦμα. Οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι ἄνευ στίχων. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὰ β΄
Καθίσματα, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ
Ὑπόμνημα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Θάλασσαν ἔπηξας, εἶτα ἡ θ΄
Ὠδὴ καὶ τῶν δύο Κανόνων, ἡ Καταβασία Ἀλλότριον τῶν Μητέρων,
τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄,
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Φωτισθέντες ἀδελφοί, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον.

---
12. Οὕτως εἴθισται τῇ Κυριακῇ ταύτῃ καὶ τῇ ἐπιούσῃ, πρὸς ἐναλλαγὴν ἴσως, ἵνα λέγωνται τὰ Θεοτοκία τοῦ Κανόνος ἀντὶ τοῦ Φωτίζου, φωτίζου...

*(Printed Page 806)*

=== LEAF p822 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday of the Paralytic Concluded (§ 22) and The Wednesday of Mid-Pentecost Opening (§§ 23–24) (p. 807)]

807

the two Theotokia. The Exapostilarion of Pascha and that of the Paralytic.
At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and the "A sacred Pascha," Glory,
"O Lord, the Paralytic," Now and ever, "It is the day of Resurrection."
Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
22.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and Entrance Hymn of Easter. After
the Entrance, the Apolytikion "Let the heavens rejoice," that of the Saint
of the Church, and the Kontakion of Pascha. The Epistle and Gospel of the
Sunday. At "Especially," "The Angel cried out . . . With one voice, O
Virgin,"¹² Communion Hymn "[Receive] the body of Christ," "Christ is
risen," "Blessed be the name of the Lord," and Dismissal.
    The Service of the Paralytic is sung until Tuesday, that is, the day
of its Leave-taking.

THE WEDNESDAY OF MID-PENTECOST

23.    On Tuesday evening, after "Christ is risen," the Introductory
Psalm. At "Lord, I have cried" we chant the 3 Stichira "Now has come the
midpoint of the days" in six (i.e., twice each), Glory, Now and ever, "As
the Feast comes to its midpoint." Entrance, the Prokimenon of the day and
the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela "The midpoint of the days
of Pentecost has arrived," with the Verses "Remember Your congrega-
tion, which You have purchased from the beginning," and "God, our King
from before the ages, has wrought salvation in the midst of the earth,"
Glory, Now and ever "At the midpoint of the Feast." The Apolytikion three
times, and Dismissal.
24.    On Wednesday at Matins, after the Midnight Service, the Trisagion,
the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion
(three times), the Psalter; then the Kathismata of the First and Second Stasis
[Stichologia], twice each. Then "Having beheld the Resurrection of
Christ" and Psalm 50 (read). Both Canons without verses. After the 3rd
Ode, the two Kathismata; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos, the
Minologion and the Postscript of the Feast. The Katavasie "You did make
the sea a wall," then the 9th Ode of both Canons and the Katavasia
"Virginity is alien to mothers"; the Exapostilarion twice. At the Praises:
3 Stichira, repeating the first, Glory, Now and ever, "Having been
enlightened, brethren." Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.

---
12. It has become the practice on this and the following Sunday, perhaps for variety, to say the Theotokia of the Canon instead of Shine, shine.

*(Printed Page 807)*

=== LEAF p823 ===
[Original Greek Text: Mid-Pentecost Concluded (§ 25) and The Fifth Sunday After Pascha: Sunday of the Samaritan Woman (§§ 26–28 Opening) (p. 808)]

808

25.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ
Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς
ἑορτῆς· ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἀλλότριον τῶν Μητέρων ἡ παρθενία, Κοινωνικὸν Ὁ
τρώγων μου τὴν σάρκα, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῌ Ε΄ ΚΥΡΙΑΚῌ ΑΠΟ ΤΟΥ ΠΑΣΧΑ

26.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, ὁ Προοιμιακὸς καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον. Εἰς
τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς
γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος. Δόξα, Παρὰ τὸ φρέαρ τοῦ Ἰακώβ,
Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ διὰ σε θεοπάτωρ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον
Κύριε ἀνελθὼν ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ, καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν. Δόξα,
τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς ἑορτῆς Μεσούσης τῆς ἑορτῆς,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

27.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς Λιτῆς Ἀγαλλιάσθω σήμερον
φαιδρῶς, καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
Μεσούσης τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον
καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν τῆς α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίας,
τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν δύο Θεοτοκίων, Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ α΄
Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ β΄ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, καὶ τὸ γ΄ αὖθις τῆς
ἑορτῆς. Ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον,
καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς. Αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ἅπασα
ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν
Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ τῶν δύο Θεοτοκίων, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Πάσχα,
τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα
δ΄ καὶ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Ἡ πηγὴ τῆς ζωαρχίας, Καὶ νῦν,
Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

28.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ
Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς
ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα· ὁ
Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως,
Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, Εὐφραίνου ἀγάλλου, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα

*(Printed Page 808)*

=== LEAF p824 ===
[English Facing Translation: Mid-Pentecost Concluded (§ 25) and The Fifth Sunday After Pascha: Sunday of the Samaritan Woman (§§ 26–28 Opening) (p. 809)]

809

25.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and Entrance Hymn of Easter. After
the Entrance, the Apolytikion and Kontakion of the Feast; the Epistle and
Gospel of the day. At "Especially," "Virginity is alien to mothers,"
Communion Hymn "He who eats My flesh," "Christ is risen," "Blessed
be the name of the Lord," and Dismissal.

THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER PASCHA

26.    On Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the
Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3
of Mid-Pentecost and 3 of the Samaritan Woman, Glory, "By Jacob's well,"
Now and ever, "The grandparent of God for Your sake." At the Aposticha:
the Resurrection Stichiron "O Lord, when You did ascend the Cross," then
the Stichira of Pascha "A sacred Pascha," Glory of the Samaritan Woman,
Now and ever of the Feast "At the midpoint of the Feast." The Resurrection
Apolytikion, that of the Feast, and Dismissal.
27.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Glory,
Now and ever of the Liti "Let [Heaven and earth] exult today in joy" and
the "It is meet"; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "At the midpoint of the
Feast," and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection
Apolytikion (twice) and that of the Feast (once), the Psalter and the
Amomos. The Kathismata of the First and Second Stasis, the Evlogitaria,
the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canon of
Easter with the two Theotokia. After the 3rd Ode, the first Kathisma of the
Feast, the second of the Samaritan Woman, and the third again of the Feast.
After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Samaritan Woman, the
Minologion and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie of Pascha and
the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then the Ninth Ode of Pascha with
the Megalynaria together with the two Theotokia. The Exapostilaria: of
Pascha, of the Samaritan Woman and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and the Stichira "A sacred Pascha," Glory, "The
well-spring of the beginning of life," Now and ever, "It is the day of
Resurrection" Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
28.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and Entrance Hymn of Easter. After
the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that of the Feast, that of
the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion of Pascha. The Epistle and Gospel
of the Sunday. At "Especially," "The Angel cried out . . . Be glad, be

*(Printed Page 809)*

=== LEAF p825 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday of the Samaritan Woman Concluded (§ 28), Weekdays of Mid-Pentecost Note, and The Sixth Sunday After Pascha: Sunday of the Blind Man (§§ 29–31 Opening) (p. 810)]

810

Χριστοῦ. Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημ. Ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος ψάλλεται μόνον τῇ
Κυριακῇ, τῇ Πέμπτῃ, τῇ Παρασκευῇ, καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ, ὅτε καὶ
ἀποδίδοται. Τῇ δὲ Δευτέρᾳ καὶ Τρίτῃ παρατείνονται τὰ μεθέορτα
τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, καὶ τῇ Τετάρτῃ ἀποδίδονται, ψαλλομένης τῆς
Ἀκολουθίας ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν § 23-25 πλὴν τῶν Ἀναγνωσμάτων.
Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας.

Τῌ ΣΤ΄ ΚΥΡΙΑΚῌ ΑΠΟ ΤΟΥ ΠΑΣΧΑ

29.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, ὁ Προοιμιακὸς καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον. Εἰς
τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ζ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ. Δόξα,
Κύριε παράγων ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ, Καὶ νῦν, Ἐν τῇ Ἐρυθρᾷ θαλάσσῃ. Εἰς
τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Σὲ τὸν σαρκωθέντα σωτῆρα Χριστόν,
καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Δικαιοσύνης Ἥλιε, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως
ἡμέρα, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὸν συνάναρχον λόγον, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον
Χαῖρε Πύλη Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

30.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, τὸ Δόξα τῆς Λιτῆς, Καὶ νῦν, Νεῦσον παρακλήσεσι, καὶ τὰ
Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς
τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ, τὸ
Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν τῆς α΄ καὶ β΄
Στιχολογίας, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ
τὸ Προκείμενον. Ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν β΄ Θεοτοκίων. Ἀπὸ
γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Ὁ τῶν ὅλων Δεσπότης δίς, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ
Οἶκος τοῦ Τυφλοῦ, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς.
Αἱ Καταβασίαι Τῷ Σωτῆρι Θεῷ, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ τῶν
β΄ Θεοτοκίων, ἡ Καταβασία Σὲ τὴν ὑπὲρ νοῦν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον
τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ τὰ β΄ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα
δ΄ καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Τίς λαλήσει τὰς
δυναστείας σου Χριστέ, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα,
Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

31.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ
Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα· ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὰ

*(Printed Page 810)*

=== LEAF p826 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday of the Samaritan Woman Concluded (§ 28), Weekdays of Mid-Pentecost Note, and The Sixth Sunday After Pascha: Sunday of the Blind Man (§§ 29–31 Opening) (p. 811)]

811

joyous," Communion Hymn "[Receive] the body of Christ," "Christ is
risen," "Blessed be the name of the Lord," and Dismissal.
Note: The Service of the Samaritan Woman is chanted only on Sunday,
Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, when we have also its Leave-taking. On
Monday and Tuesday we sing the Post-feast hymns of Mid-Pentecost. On
Wednesday we have the Leave-taking, the Service being sung as prescribed
in Paragraphs 23 - 25 except for the Readings. The Epistle and Gospel are
of the day.

THE SIXTH SUNDAY FROM EASTER

29.    On Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the
Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 7 Stichira of the Resurrection, and
3 of the Blind Man, Glory, "Lord, passing by on the way," Now and ever,
"In the Red Sea." At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichiron "You, the
savior Christ who took on flesh," then the Stichira of Pascha "A sacred
Pascha," Glory, "O Sun of Righteousness," Now and ever "It is the day
of Resurrection." The Resurrection Apolytikion "The co-eternal Word,"
the Theotokion "Hail, impassable Gate of the Lord," and Dismissal.
30.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Glory
of the Liti, Now and ever "Incline to the entreaties" and the "It is meet";
then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the
Lord": the Apolytikion (twice) and the Theotokion (once), the Psalter and
the Amomos. The Kathismata, in order, of the First and Second Stasis
[Stichologia], the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi and
the Prokimenon. The Canon of Easter with the two Theotokia. After the 3rd
Ode, the Kathisma "As the Master of all" (twice); after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Blind Man, the Minologion and the Postscript of
the Sunday. The Katavasie "Let us sing unto the Savior God" and the entire
order of the Morning Gospel; then the Ninth Ode of Pascha with the
Megalynaria together with the two Theotokia and the Katavasia "You, who
are beyond the human mind." The Exapostilarion of Pascha and the two
Exapostilaria of the Blind Man. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and
the Stichira "A sacred Pascha," Glory, "Who can tell of Your mighty acts,
O Christ," Now and ever, "It is the day of Resurrection," Great Doxology
and "Today salvation."
31.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and Entrance Hymn of Easter. After
the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that of the Saint of the
Church, and the Kontakion of Pascha. The Apostolos and Gospel of the

*(Printed Page 811)*

=== LEAF p827 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday of the Blind Man Concluded (§ 31) and The Apodosis of the Blind Man (§§ 32–34) (p. 812)]

812

Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα,
Φωτίζου, φωτίζου, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη
τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
32.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Τυφλοῦ.
Εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ ἐν τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ τῇ Τρίτῃ
ἑσπέρας σημειούμενα κατὰ σειρὰν ς΄ Ἰδιόμελα. Δόξα, Τίς λαλήσει
τὰς δυναστείας σου Χριστέ, Καὶ νῦν, Ἐν τῇ Ἐρυθρᾷ θαλάσσῃ. Εἰς
τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ τοῦ Σαββάτου ἑσπέρας τῆς Ὀκτωήχου δ΄ Στιχηρὰ
Διὰ τοῦ Τιμίου σου Σταυροῦ, Ὁ τὴν Ἀνάστασιν διδούς, Μέγα θαῦμα
καὶ τὸ Ἀπόστιχον Σὲ τὸν σαρκωθέντα, μετὰ τῶν στίχων Ὁ Κύριος
ἐβασίλευσε κτλ. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Δικαιοσύνης Ἥλιε, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὸν συνάναρχον λόγον, τὸ Θεοτοκίον Χαῖρε Πύλη
Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
33.    Τῇ Τρίτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ ἅπαξ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ
Καθίσματα τῆς α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίας τὰ ἐν τῇ Τετάρτῃ σημειούμενα,
τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς καὶ ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Κυριακῆς
Σταύρωσιν ἑκούσιον, οὗ ὁ Στίχος Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν Δόξα σοι,
καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος Ἄνω πρὸς τὸν Πατέρα μετὰ τοῦ αὐτοῦ Στίχου.
Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Ὠμμάτωσας Χριστέ, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον
Ἐτέχθης ὡς αὐτός. Ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ τῆς
Κυριακῆς, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας. Αἱ
Καταβασίαι Τῷ Σωτῆρι Θεῷ, καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν,
ἡ Καταβασία Σὲ τὴν ὑπὲρ νοῦν, τὰ β΄ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ Ἐξαποστειλάρια.
Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ γ΄, τὰ τῶν Αἴνων τῆς
Κυριακῆς, καὶ τὰ γ΄ πρῶτα ἑσπέρια τοῦ Τυφλοῦ. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Τίς λαλήσει τὰς δυναστείας σου Χριστέ, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ
τὸ Τὸν συνάναρχον λόγον.
34.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ
Εἰσοδικόν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῆς ψυχῆς τὰ ὄμματα,
Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως
Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἡμέρας, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ
ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 812)*

=== LEAF p828 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday of the Blind Man Concluded (§ 31) and The Apodosis of the Blind Man (§§ 32–34) (p. 813)]

813

Sunday. At "Especially," "The Angel cried out . . . Shine, shine,"
Communion Hymn "[Receive] the body of Christ," [the Apolytikion]
"Christ is risen," "Blessed be the name of the Lord," and Dismissal.
32.    On Monday evening, the Leave-taking of the Service of the Blind
Man takes place. At "Lord, I have cried" we sing the six Idiomela from the
Pentikostarion which are found in the Vespers of Tuesday evening. Glory,
"Who can tell of Your mighty acts, O Christ," Now and ever, "In the Red
Sea." At the Aposticha: the Saturday Stichira of the Oktoichos "By Your
precious Cross," "He Who has granted the Resurrection, "O great
wonder!" and the Apostichon "You, Who took on flesh" with the Verses
"The Lord has reigned as King" etc. Glory, Now and ever, "The Sun of
Righteousness." The Apolytikion "The co-eternal Word," the Theotokion
"Hail! impassable Gate of the Lord," and Dismissal.
33.    On Tuesday at Matins, after Midnight Service, the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion
(twice) and the Theotokion (once), then the Psalter. The Kathismata of the
First and Second Stasis [Stichologia], which are indicated on Wednesday
morning. Then we recite the "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ,"
Psalm 50 and the Canon of Sunday "Having accepted a voluntary crucifix-
ion," with the Verse "Glory to You, our God, glory to You" and of the Pre-
feast "Up unto the Father" with its verse. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma
"You gave eyes, O Christ" and the other one, i.e., "You were born as such."
After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Sunday and the Minologion
of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie "Let us sing unto the Savior God,"
and we chant "More honorable" with the Katavasia "You, who are beyond
the human mind." The two Exapostilaria of the Blind Man. At the Praises:
3 Resurrection Stichira of the Sunday, and the first 3 Vesper hymns of the
Blind Man, Glory, Now and ever, "Who can tell of Your mighty acts, O
Christ," Great Doxology and "The co-eternal Word."
34.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and Entrance Hymn of Easter. After
the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saint of the Church,
the Kontakion "My soul's eyes," the Epistle and Gospel of the day. At
"Especially," "It is meet," the Communion Hymn of the day, [the
Apolytikion] "Christ is risen," "Blessed be the name of the Lord" and
Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 813)*

=== LEAF p829 ===
[Original Greek Text: Wednesday of the 6th Week: The Apodosis of the Feast of Pascha (§§ 35–36) (p. 814)]

814

Τῌ ΤΕΤΑΡΤῌ ΤΗΣ ΣΤ΄ ΕΒΔΟΜΑΔΟΣ

Η ΑΠΟΔΟΣΙΣ ΤΗΣ ΕΟΡΤΗΣ ΤΟΥ ΠΑΣΧΑ

35.    Τῇ Τρίτῃ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ θ΄ ὥρα τρίψαλμος, ἐν ᾗ
λέγομεν Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὸν συνάναρχον λόγον, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῆς
ψυχῆς τὰ ὄμματα· εἶτα ἀντὶ τοῦ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς λέγεται (ὡς
εἴθισται νῦν) Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοουσίῳ ψάλλεται ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως
ἔσωθεν τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη γ΄ καὶ ἀνὰ γ΄ ὑπὸ [ἑκάστου] τῶν Χορῶν,
καὶ ἅπαξ αὖθις ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως. [Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ τάξις τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου ἁπλῶς
λέγει· «Καὶ ψάλλομεν τὸ Χριστὸς Ἀνέστη, μετὰ τῶν στίχων αὐτοῦ ὅπως ἔγινε τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ
Πάσχα.» Ὡς φαίνεται, ἀπαιτεῖται ἐδῶ ἡ ἰδία τάξις, δηλαδή, ἐὰν ἕκαστος τῶν δύο Χορῶν ψάλλει
τὸ Χριστὸς Ἀνέστη ἐκ γ΄, τότε ἔχομεν τὸ σύνολον τῶν 10 ὅπως εἰς τὸ Πάσχα.]

    Εἶτα ἡ Συναπτή. Εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Στιχηρὰ
τῆς Ὀκτωήχου Τὰς ἑσπερινὰς ἡμῶν εὐχὰς κατὰ σειρὰν ς΄. Δόξα,
Τὸν τῷ Πατρὶ συνάναρχον, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν παγκόσμιον δόξαν. Εἴσοδος,
καὶ τὸ τῆς ἡμέρας Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Στιχηρὸν Τῷ
πάθει σου Χριστέ, καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως
ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρίς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

36.    Τῷ πρωῒ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸ μεσονυκτικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα
(ὅρα ἐν § 2 ὑποσημ. 8) ὁ Ἱερεὺς θυμιῶν ἐνώπιον τῆς Ἁγίας Τραπέζης
ἐκφωνεῖ Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοουσίῳ, καὶ ψάλλει τὸ Χριστὸς
ἀνέστη, ὡς χθές· εἶτα ἡ Συναπτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν εἰς δ΄,
ἡ Καταβασία ὁμοῦ, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη γ΄, τὸ Ἀναστὰς ὁ
Ἰησοῦς, ἡ Αἴτησις καὶ ἡ Ἐκφώνησις ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ. Ἀπὸ γ΄
Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι τὸν Ὄρθρον, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον
καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ γ΄,
τὸ Ἀναστὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, καὶ ἡ ζ΄ καὶ η΄ τοῦ Κανόνος Ὠδή· εἶτα
Τὴν θεοτόκον, καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων,
τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον Σαρκὶ ὑπνώσας ἐκ γ΄. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ
Στιχηρὰ Ὑμνοῦμέν σου Χριστὲ εἰς δ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν,
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρίς,
καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.

*(Printed Page 814)*

=== LEAF p830 ===
[English Facing Translation: Wednesday of the 6th Week: The Apodosis of the Feast of Pascha (§§ 35–36) (p. 815)]

815

WEDNESDAY OF THE 6TH WEEK

THE LEAVE-TAKING OF THE FEAST OF EASTER

35.    On Tuesday evening the Ninth Hour is read as tri-psalmic [i.e. as
involving three psalms], at which we say the Apolytikion "The co-eternal
Word," and the Kontakion "My soul's eyes"; then, instead of the usual
"Blessed is our God," we say (as is the custom now) "Glory to the Holy,
and Consubstantial." Then the Priest inside the Sanctuary sings "Christ
is risen" three times; this hymn is sung also three times by {each of the 2}
Choirs, and again immediately once by the Priest. {Note that the rubrics of the
Pentikostarion state simply: "And we chant Christ is risen with its verses, exactly as was done
on the day of Pascha." Apparently, this order is what is actually being called for here: if each
of the two Choirs sings "Christ is risen" three times, then we have the sum total of 10 as on
Easter.}
    Then the Synapti [Litany of Petitions] follows. At "Lord, I have
cried" we chant the six Stichira of the Oktoichos "Accept our evening
prayers" Glory, "Him Who is co-eternal with the Father," Now and ever,
"The universal glory." Entrance and the Prokimenon of the day. At the
Aposticha: the Stichiron "By Your Passion, O Christ," then the [Stichira
of Pascha] "A sacred Pascha" with their verses, Glory, Now and ever, "It
is the day of Resurrection," then "Christ is risen" three times, and the
Dismissal.
36.    In the morning at Matins, after the Midnight Service of Pascha (see
Paragraph 2, note 8), the Priest censing in front of the Holy Table exclaims
"Glory to the Holy, and Consubstantial, [and Life-creating, and Indivis-
ible Trinity]," and chants "Christ is risen" as yesterday; then the Synapti
and the Canon is sung in four hymns including the Katavasia. Then we chant
"Christ is risen" (three times), the "Jesus, having arisen," the Litany and
the Exclamation of each Ode. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi "Coming
before the dawn" (read); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and the Ikos of
Pascha, then "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ" (three times), the
"Jesus, having risen"; then the 7th and 8th Odes of the Canon are chanted.
Then "The Theotokos [and Mother of the Light]" and the 9th Ode is sung
with its Megalynaria. The Exapostilarion "Having slept in the flesh as a
mortal" (3 times). At the Praises: the 4 Resurrection Stichira "We praise,
O Christ" and the Stichira "A sacred Pascha" with its verses, Glory, Now
and ever, "It is the day of Resurrection," the "Christ is risen" (three
times), and the Liturgy begins.

*(Printed Page 815)*
