=== LEAF p911 ===
[Original Greek Text: Feasts Horologion Concluded (p. 896)]

896

   Τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν Θεοφανίων σημαίνει εἰς τὰς ι΄ τῆς νυκτός, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται εἰς τὰς ια΄ καὶ ἡμίσειαν, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὰς β΄.
   Τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ὀρθοδοξίας σημαίνει εἰς τὰς ι΄ καὶ ἡμίσειαν, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται εἰς τὰς ιβ΄, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὰς β΄ καὶ ἡμίσειαν.
   Τῇ Ἁγίᾳ καὶ Μ. Πέμπτῃ, εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον σημαίνει εἰς τὰς ια΄, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται εἰς τὰς ιβ΄, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ ἡμίσειαν.
   Τῇ ἑσπέρᾳ, εἰς Ἀκολουθίαν τῶν ἁγίων Παθῶν σημαίνει εἰς τὰς ιβ΄, μετὰ ἡμίσειαν ὥραν κατέρχεται ὁ Πατριάρχης, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὰς δ΄ τῆς νυκτός.
   Τῇ Ἁγίᾳ καὶ Μ. Παρασκευῇ εἰς τὰς Ὥρας σημαίνει τῇ ια΄, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται μετὰ ἡμίσειαν ὥραν, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὰς γ΄ καὶ ἡμίσειαν.
   Τῇ ἑσπέρᾳ, εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον τοῦ Ἐπιταφίου, σημαίνει εἰς τὰς ιβ΄, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται μετὰ ἡμίσειαν ὥραν, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὰς δ΄ νυκτός.
   Τῷ Ἁγίῳ καὶ Μ. Σαββάτῳ πρωῒ σημαίνει εἰς τὰς ιβ΄, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ ἡμίσειαν.
   Τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα σημαίνει εἰς τὰς ε΄ νυκτός, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται μετὰ ἡμίσειαν ὥραν, ἡ Ἀνάστασις εἰς τὰς ς΄ καὶ ἡμίσειαν, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὰς θ΄ τῆς νυκτός.
   Τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς Ἀναστάσεως σημαίνει εἰς τὰς γ΄, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται εἰς τὰς δ΄, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὰς ς΄.

   Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου σημαίνει εἰς τὰς ια΄, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται μετὰ ἡμίσειαν ὥραν, Ἀπόλυσις εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ ἡμίσειαν.

*(Printed Page 896)*

=== LEAF p912 ===
[English Facing Translation: Feasts Horologion Concluded (p. 897)]

897

   On the day of Epiphany [January 6] the service begins and the church bells ring at 4 a.m., the Patriarch arrives at 5:30 a.m., Dismissal at 8 a.m.
   On the Sunday of Orthodoxy, the service begins and the church bells ring at 4:30 a.m.; the Patriarch arrives at 6 a.m., Dismissal at 8:30 a.m.

   On Holy and Great Thursday, Matins begins and the church bells ring at 5 a.m.; the Patriarch arrives at 6 a.m., Dismissal at 7:30 a.m.

   That evening, the Service of the Holy Passion begins and the church bells ring at 6 p.m., the Patriarch arrives at 6:30 p.m., Dismissal at 10 p.m.
   On Holy and Great Friday, the Hours begin and the church bells ring at 5 a.m.; the Patriarch arrives at 5:30 a.m., Dismissal at 9:30 a.m.

   That evening, the Matins of the Epitaphios begins and the church bells ring at 6 p.m., the Patriarch arrives at 6:30 p.m., Dismissal at 10 p.m.

   On Holy and Great Saturday the service begins and the church bells ring at 5 a.m., the Dismissal at 7:30 a.m.
   The Sunday of Easter begins and the church bells ring at 11 p.m.; the Patriarch arrives at 11:30 p.m., the Resurrection Service at 12:30 a.m., Dismissal at 3 a.m.
   The Vespers of the Resurrection [also known as the Agape Vespers] begins and the church bells ring at 9 a.m; the Patriarch arrives at 10 a.m., the Dismissal at 12 noon.

   On Monday of Bright [Renewal] Week, Matins begins and the church bells ring at 5 a.m.; the Patriarch arrives at 5:30 a.m., Dismissal at 7:30 a.m.

*(Printed Page 897)*

=== LEAF p913 ===
[Original Greek Text: Register of Feasts at Which the Patriarch Officiates (Part 1, p. 898)]

898

ΣΗΜΕΙΩΣΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΕΟΡΤΩΝ

ΚΑΘ’ ΑΣ ΧΟΡΟΣΤΑΤΕΙ

Ο ΠΑΤΡΙΑΡΧΗΣ

ΕΝ Τῼ ΠΑΤΡΙΑΡΧΙΚῼ ΝΑῼ

Καθ’ ἅπαντας τοὺς Ἑσπερινοὺς τοῦ Σαββάτου καὶ τὰς Κυριακὰς τοῦ ὅλου ἐνιαυτοῦ.
      Τὴν ἐπέτειον τοῦ ὀνόματος Αὐτοῦ.
Σεπτεμβρίου Α΄.     Τὴν Α΄ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου (ἐν τῷ παραθρονίῳ).
            Η΄.     Τὸ Γενέσιον τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου.
           ΙΔ΄.     Τὴν Ὕψωσιν τοῦ τιμίου Σταυροῦ.
Ὀκτωβρίου  Κϛ΄.     Τοῦ ἁγίου Δημητρίου.
Νοεμβρίου   Η΄.     Τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν.
           ΚΑ΄.     Τῶν Εἰσοδίων τῆς Θεοτόκου.
            Λ΄.     Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀνδρέου.
Δεκεμβρίου  ΣΤ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Νικολάου.
           ΚΔ΄.     Τὴν παραμονὴν τῶν Χριστουγέννων εἰς τὰς Ὥρας.
           ΚΕ΄.     Τῶν Χριστουγέννων.
           Κϛ΄.     Τὴν σύναξιν τῆς Θεοτόκου
Ἰανουαρίου  Α΄.     Τὴν Περιτομὴν τοῦ Κυρίου.
            Ε΄.     Τὴν Παραμονὴν τῶν Θεοφανίων εἰς τὰς Ὥρας.
           ΣΤ΄.     Τῶν ἁγίων Θεοφανίων.
            Ζ΄.     Τὴν Σύναξιν τοῦ Προδρόμου.
            Λ΄.     Τῶν Τριῶν Ἱεραρχῶν.
Φεβρουαρίου Β΄.     Τὴν Ὑπαπαντὴν τοῦ Κυρίου.
Μαρτίου    ΚΕ΄.     Τὸν Εὐαγγελισμὸν τῆς Θεοτόκου.
Ἀπριλίου   ΚΓ΄.     Τοῦ ἁγίου Γεωργίου.
Μαΐου      ΚΑ΄.     Τοῦ ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου.
Ἰουνίου    ΚΔ΄.     Τὸ Γενέθλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου.
           ΚΘ΄.     Τῶν ἁγίων Ἀποστόλων.
Ἰουλίου    ΙΑ΄.     Τῆς ἁγίας Εὐφημίας.
Αὐγούστου  ΣΤ΄.     Τῆς Μεταμορφώσεως.

*(Printed Page 898)*

=== LEAF p914 ===
[English Facing Translation: Register of Feasts at Which the Patriarch Officiates (Part 1, p. 899)]

899

NOTES ON THE FEASTS

AT WHICH THE PATRIARCH OFFICIATES

IN

THE PATRIARCHAL CHURCH

At all the Saturday evening Vespers and the Sundays of the entire year.
On the anniversary of His feastday (nameday).

September 1: The First of the Indiction (from the Parathrone).
September 8: The Nativity of the All-holy Theotokos.
September 14: The Elevation of the Holy Cross.
October 26: Saint Demetrios.
November 8: The Archangels.
November 21: The Presentation of the Theotokos in the Temple.
November 30: Saint Andrew.
December 6: Saint Nicholas.
December 24: The Eve of Christmas at the Hours.
December 25: Christmas.
December 26: The Synaxis of the Theotokos.
January 1: The Circumcision of the Lord.
January 5: The Eve of Theophany [Epiphany] at the Hours.
January 6: The Holy Theophany [Epiphany].
January 7: The Synaxis of the Forerunner.
January 30: The Three Hierarchs.
February 2: The Presentation of the Lord in the Temple.
March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos.
April 23: Saint George.
May 21: Saint Constantine.
June 24: The Nativity of the Forerunner.
June 29: The Holy Apostles.
July 11: Saint Euphemia.
August 6: The Transfiguration.

*(Printed Page 899)*

=== LEAF p915 ===
[Original Greek Text: Register of Feasts at Which the Patriarch Officiates (Part 2, p. 900)]

900

           ΙΕ΄.     Τῆς Κοιμήσεως τῆς Θεοτόκου.
           ΚΘ΄.     Τῆς Ἀποτομῆς τοῦ Προδρόμου.

           Τῌ ΑΓΙᾼ ΚΑΙ Μ. ΤΕΣΣΑΡΑΚΟΣΤῌ

   Εἰς τὸν Ἀκάθιστον Ὕμνον τὸ δὲ πρωῒ ἐν τῷ παραθρονίῳ.
   Τῇ Ἁγίᾳ καὶ Μ. Πέμπτῃ, τὸ πρωῒ εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, καὶ τὸ ἑσπέρας εἰς τὴν Ἀκολουθίαν τῶν Ἁγίων Παθῶν.
   Τῇ Ἁγίᾳ καὶ Μ. Παρασκευῇ εἰς τὰς Ὥρας καὶ τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, καὶ τὸ ἑσπέρας εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον τοῦ Ἐπιταφίου.
   Τῷ Ἁγίῳ καὶ Μ. Σαββάτῳ πρωῒ εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν καὶ τὴν Λειτουργίαν.
   Τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ, Τρίτῃ καὶ Παρασκευῇ τῆς Διακαινησίμου.
   Τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς Ἀναλήψεως.
   Ἰστέον ὅτι, κατὰ τὴν ἐπικρατήσασαν ἔκπαλαι ἐν τῇ Μ. Ἐκκλησίᾳ συνήθειαν, ὁσάκις ἂν ἐχοροστάτει ὁ Πατριάρχης, συνεχοροστάτουν αὐτῷ καὶ οἱ Συνοδικοὶ Ἀρχιερεῖς, ἀλλὰ τανῦν ἐν πᾶσι μὲν τοῖς Ὄρθροις καὶ ταῖς Λειτουργίαις συγχοροστατοῦσι, μόνον ὅμως ἐν τοῖς ἐφεξῆς Ἑσπερινοῖς, ἤτοι ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τοῦ ὀνόματος τῆς Α.Θ. Παναγιότητος, τῆς Α΄ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου, τῆς Παραμονῆς τῶν Χριστουγέννων καὶ τῶν Θεοφανίων, τῆς Α΄ τοῦ ἔτους, τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Ὀρθοδοξίας, τῆς Ἀκαθίστου, τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ, τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Βαΐων, τῆς Μ. Πέμπτης, τῆς Μ. Παρασκευῆς, τοῦ Μ. Σαββάτου, τῆς Ἀναστάσεως, τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ ἁγίου Γεωργίου, τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Θωμᾶ, καὶ τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς. Ἐκτὸς δὲ τούτων τῶν ἐπισήμων Χοροστασιῶν, ὁ Οἰκουμενικὸς Πατριάρχης κατερχόμενος ἐν τῷ Ναῷ ἵσταται ἐν τῷ παραθρονίῳ (γεδέκι) μετὰ χαζρανίου καὶ ἄνευ Μανδύου, κατὰ τοὺς Ἑσπερινοὺς τῶν Κυριακῶν τῆς Ἁγ. καὶ Μ. Τεσσαρακοστῆς, τὰς Προηγιασμένας, ἐν τῷ Μεγάλῳ Ἀποδείπνῳ καὶ τῷ Κανόνι τῷ ψαλλομένῳ τὴν Α΄ Ἑβδομάδα τῆς Τεσσαρακοστῆς, τὴν ἑσπέραν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ Μεγ. Κανόνος, τὴν πρωΐαν τῆς Ἀκαθίστου, τὴν ἑορτὴν τοῦ ἐν ἁγίοις Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Ἰωάννου τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου Ἀρχιεπισκόπου Κωνσταντινουπόλεως (ἐὰν μὴ τύχῃ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ ὅτι ἐὰν βούληται ὁ Πατριάρχης, χοροστατεῖ ἐν τῷ θρόνῳ φέρων Μανδύαν), καὶ τὴν ἑορτὴν τῆς Ἰνδίκτου.

*(Printed Page 900)*

=== LEAF p916 ===
[English Facing Translation: Register of Feasts at Which the Patriarch Officiates (Part 2, p. 901)]

901

August 15: The Dormition of the Theotokos.
August 29: The Beheading of the Forerunner.

DURING HOLY AND GREAT LENT

The Akathist Hymn, and in the morning at the Parathrone.
On Holy and Great Thursday, in the morning at the Liturgy and in the evening at the Service of the Holy Passion.
On Holy and Great Friday at the Hours and the Vespers, and in the evening at the Matins of the Epitaphios.
On Holy and Great Saturday in the morning at Vespers and the Liturgy.
On the Sunday of Easter, and Monday, Tuesday and Friday of Bright [Renewal] Week.
On Thursday of the Ascension.
Note that according to the ancient custom and practice of the Great Church, whenever the Patriarch officiated, the Hierarchs of the Synod officiated with him, but not necessarily at all the Matins and Liturgies, and only at the following Vespers: the Nameday of the Patriarch, the First of the Indiction, the Eve of Christmas and Theophany [Epiphany], the first of the year, the Sunday of Orthodoxy, the Akathist, the Annunciation, Palm Sunday, Holy Thursday, Holy Friday, Holy Saturday, The Resurrection, Saint George, the Sunday of Thomas, and the Sunday of Pentecost. Aside from these formal Officiations, the Ecumenical Patriarch, when he comes down to the Church, stands at the Parathrone (Gedeki) with the Chazranion and without the Mandya, at the Vespers of the Sundays of Holy and Great Lent, the Presanctified Liturgies, the Great Compline and the Canon chanted during the First Week of Great Lent, the evening of the Service of the Great Canon, the morning of the Akathist, the Feast of Our Father among the Saints, John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople (if the Feast does not occur on a Sunday, then if the Patriarch so desires, he officiates from the [Patriarchal] throne wearing a Mandya), and on the Feast of the Indiction.

*(Printed Page 901)*

=== LEAF p917 ===
[Original Greek Text: Concerning Ordination of a Hierarch (Part 1, p. 902)]

902

ΠΕΡΙ
ΧΕΙΡΟΤΟΝΙΑΣ [ΑΡΧΙΕΡΕΩΣ]

Α΄.

   Ὅταν γίνηται χειροτονία Ἀρχιερέως ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ἄλλῃ πλὴν τῆς Κυριακῆς καὶ μὴ τύχῃ μνήμη ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, ψάλλονται πάντα τὰ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς Ἀπολυτίκια, Κοντάκια, Καθίσματα, Κανόνες, Καταβασίαι, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, Αἶνοι, Ἀντίφωνα, Εἰσοδικόν, Ἀπόστολος, Εὐαγγέλιον καὶ Κοινωνικόν.

Β΄.

   Ἄν δ’ ἡ χειροτονία συμβῇ ἐν Κυριακῇ ἁπλῇ, λέγονται Καταβασίαι τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, καὶ μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς. Ἐξαποστειλάρια πρῶτον τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον εἶτα τὸ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, ἄνευ Θεοτοκίου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους μετὰ τὰ δ΄ Ἀναστάσιμα λέγονται καὶ τὰ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς Παράδοξα σήμερον, Δόξα, Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη. Μετὰ τὴν Δοξολογίαν τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς. Εἰσοδικὸν Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἀναστάς. Εἶτα τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Εὐλογητὸς εἶ, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὅτε καταβάς. Τὸ Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν ἀντὶ τοῦ Αἰνεῖτε, Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθόν.

Γ΄.

   Ἡ αὐτὴ ἀναλογία τηρητέα καὶ ὅταν ἡ χειροτονία Ἀρχιερέως γίνηται ἐν ἄλλῃ πλὴν Κυριακῆς ἡμέρᾳ, καὶ ἑορτάζηται ὁ Ἅγιος τῆς

*(Printed Page 902)*

=== LEAF p918 ===
[English Facing Translation: Concerning Ordination of a Hierarch (Part 1, p. 903)]

903

CONCERNING
ORDINATION [OF A HIERARCH]

Situation One

   When the Ordination of a Hierarch occurs on any day except Sunday and it is not the feast of a celebrating Saint, we sing all the hymns from Pentecost: the Apolytikia, Kontakia, Kathismata, Canons, Katavasie, Exapostilaria, Praises, Antiphons, Entrance Hymn, Epistle, Gospel and Communion Hymn.

Situation Two

   If the Ordination occurs on a plain [regular] Sunday, the Katavasie of Pentecost are said, and, following "More honorable," the Ninth Ode of Pentecost. Exapostilaria: first that of the Resurrection then that of Pentecost, without a Theotokion. At the Praises: after the Four Resurrection Stichira we sing those of Pentecost "Strange things today," Glory, "Heavenly King," Now and ever, "Most blessed." After the Doxology, "Today Salvation." At the Liturgy, the Antiphons of Pentecost, the Entrance Hymn "O come let us worship ... who is risen." Then the Resurrection Apolytikion, the "Blessed are You," the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "When you came down." The Trisagios Hymn, the Apostolos of Pentecost and the Gospel of the coinciding Sunday, "It is meet." Communion Hymn, instead of "Praise," "Your Spirit."

Situation Three

   This same format is followed when the ordination of a Hierarch occurs on any other day except Sunday, and the Saint of the day is

*(Printed Page 903)*

=== LEAF p919 ===
[Original Greek Text: Concerning Ordination of a Hierarch (Part 2, p. 904)]

904

ἡμέρας· ἀλλ’ ἐν τοιαύτῃ περιπτώσει προηγοῦνται ἐναντιρρήτως τὰ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς καὶ ἕπονται τὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου.

Δ΄.

   Ἐν Κυριακῇ δὲ μετὰ Ἁγίου δεδοξασμένου ἄν συμπέσῃ χειροτονία Ἀρχιερέως, μετὰ τὰς Καταβασίας τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς Τὴν τιμιωτέραν καὶ τὴν θ΄ Ὠδὴν τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄, Δόξα, Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη. Μετὰ τὴν Δοξολογίαν Σήμερον σωτηρία. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν...ὁ ἀναστάς. Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὅτε καταβάς. (Τὰ λοιπὰ ὡς ἀνωτέρω ἐν § Β΄.)

Ε΄.

   Ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Θεομητορικῆς ἑορτῆς ἄν τελῆται χειροτονία Ἀρχιερέως, Καταβασίαι ψάλλονται αἱ κεκανονισμέναι τῆς ἐποχῆς, καὶ μόνον Ἐξαποστειλάριον πρὸ τοῦ τῆς ἑορτῆς ψάλλεται τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς· καὶ εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους δύο μόνον Στιχηρὰ ἐκ τῶν τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς. Δόξα τὸ Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς δὲ τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἀπολυτίκια, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, πρῶτον τὸ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, δεύτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Ἀπόστολος ἐπίσης τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς.

ΣΤ΄. *

   Ἐν Δεσποτικῇ ἑορτῇ ἄν τελῆται χειροτονία Ἀρχιερέως, οὐδὲν ἄλλο ψάλλεται ἐκ τῶν τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς εἰμὴ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον, οὗ ὅμως προηγεῖται ἅπαξ τό τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἕπεται αὖθις τὸ αὐτό. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν Εἴσοδον, λέγεται τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς ἀπὸ τοῦ Βήματος μετὰ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ οὐδὲν πλέον.

---
* Ἐσφαλμένως δεικνύεται ὡς Ζ΄.

*(Printed Page 904)*

=== LEAF p920 ===
[English Facing Translation: Concerning Ordination of a Hierarch (Part 2, p. 905)]

905

celebrated; but in this situation, the hymns of Pentecost precede indisputably those of the Saint.

Situation Four

   If the ordination of a Hierarch occurs on a Sunday with a celebrating Saint, after the Katavasie of Pentecost, we sing "More honorable" and the Ninth Ode of Pentecost. Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of Pentecost, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: two Stichira of the Resurrection, three of Pentecost, and three of the Saint. Glory "Heavenly King," Now and ever "Most blessed." After the Doxology "Today salvation." In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of Pentecost, the Entrance Hymn "Come let us worship ... who is risen." Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of Pentecost, of the Saint of the day, of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "When You came down." (The rest as above in Situation Two.)

Situation Five

   If the ordination of a Hierarch occurs on a Feast of the Theotokos, the Katavasie are those ordained for the season, and only the Exapostilarion of Pentecost is sung before that of the Feast. At the Praises: only two Stichira of Pentecost. Glory, "Heavenly King," Now and ever of the Feast. In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast. After the Entrance, first the Apolytikion of Pentecost, then that of the Feast; the Epistle also is that of Pentecost.

Situation Six*

   If the ordination of a Hierarch occurs on a Feast of the Lord, nothing else of Pentecost is chanted except the Exapostilarion, which is both preceded and followed by that of the Feast. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of Pentecost from the Holy Sanctuary followed by the Apolytikion of the Feast and nothing more.

---
* [Erroneously shown in Violakis as Situation 7]

*(Printed Page 905)*
