=== LEAF p271 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday before the Nativity of Christ (The Holy Fathers) — Case 2 (p. 256)]

256

Β΄.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως Κυριακὴ ἀπὸ τῆς κ΄ μέχρι τῆς κγ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, Προεόρτια Παρθένε πανάμωμε Θεοῦ γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τῶν Πατέρων Τὰ τῶν Πατέρων σήμερον πιστοὶ, Δόξα Δανιὴλ ἀνὴρ ἐπιθυμιῶν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῶν Πατέρων. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα Χαίρετε προφῆται τίμιοι, Καὶ νῦν Ἰδοὺ καιρὸς ἤγγικε, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἑτοιμάζου Βηθλεὲμ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὸ Δόξα τῆς Λιτῆς Βολίδες ἀστράπτοντες, Καὶ νῦν Προεόρτιον Ἄκουε οὐρανὲ, τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἑτοιμάζου Βηθλεὲμ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, Καθίσματα ἀναστάσιμα δύο καὶ ἓν προεόρτιον Τῶν προφητῶν αἱ ῥήσεις καὶ αὖθις Ἀναστάσιμα δύο καὶ ἕτερον Προεόρτιον Αὐλῶν ποιμενικῶν (ζήτει ἀμφότερα τῇ κδ΄ τοῦ μηνός)· εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· ὁ Κανὼν τῶν Πατέρων Κύματι θαλάσσης, μετὰ δὲ τὸν Εἱρμὸν ἑκάστης Ὠδῆς, λέγεται Στίχος Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ ἀναστάσει σου Κύριε, εἰς τὰ λοιπὰ Τροπάρια Ἅγιοι τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ εἰς τὰ τελευταῖα δύο Δόξα Καὶ νῦν· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Ἄγγελος παίδων καὶ τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον χῦμα, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον Εὐφραίνου Βηθλεὲμ καὶ ὁ Οἶκος Τῆς σῆς Παρθένε κυήσεως, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Πατέρων καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Πατέρων δ΄, Δόξα Τῶν νομικῶν διδαγμάτων ὁ σύλλογος, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Πατέρων δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν

*(Printed Page 256)*

=== LEAF p272 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday before the Nativity of Christ — Situation Two (p. 257)]

257

SITUATION TWO

4.    If the Sunday before the Nativity of Christ is celebrated from the 20th until the 23rd of the month, in Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Pre-feast “Most immaculate Virgin of God,” and 3 of the Fathers “We celebrate today the memory of the ancestors of Christ,” Glory, “Daniel the man of desires,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Fathers. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory “Rejoice, O honored prophets,” Now and ever, “Behold, the time of our salvation.” The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, and of the Pre-feast “Make ready, Bethlehem,” and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Glory of the Liti “Shining like meteors,” Now and ever, “Listen, O heaven,” the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Make ready, Bethlehem” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata: two of the Resurrection and one of the Pre-feast “The sayings of the prophets,” and immediately two Resurrection Kathismata and another of the Pre-feast “As shepherds were piping” (these are both found on the 24th of this month); then the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon; the Canon of the Fathers “Waves of the sea,” the Verse of the first hymn after the Irmos being “Glory to your holy Resurrection O Lord”; for the rest of the hymns, the Verse “Saints of God”; and for the last two hymns Glory, Now and ever. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “An angel dampened the fire of the children” and the Resurrection Kontakion (read); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion “Rejoice, Bethlehem” and the Ikos “Of your conception, O Virgin,” the Minologion of the Saints of the day and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie “Christ is born,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers and of the Pre-feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Fathers, Glory, “The collection of Mosaic teachings,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Fathers. After the Entrance,

*(Printed Page 257)*

=== LEAF p273 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday before the Nativity of Christ — Case 2 Concl. / Case 3 (p. 258)]

258

Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον, τῶν Πατέρων καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Γ΄.

7.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως Κυριακὴ τῇ κδ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ οὐδὲν τῶν Ἀναστασίμων ψάλλομεν, ἀλλὰ τὰ τῶν Πατέρων μετὰ τῶν Προεορτίων οὕτω· Μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Προσόμοια τῶν Πατέρων Τὰ τῶν Πατέρων σήμερον πιστοὶ εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ Προεόρτια Προεορτάσωμεν λαοὶ Χριστοῦ τὰ γενέθλια (ζήτει τῇ κ΄ τοῦ Μηνός). Δόξα Δανιὴλ ἐπιθυμιῶν, Καὶ νῦν Σπήλαιον εὐτρεπίζου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια Παρθένε πανάμωμε Θεοῦ (ζήτει ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ), οἱ Στίχοι Ὁ Θεὸς ἀπὸ Θαιμὰν ἥξει, καὶ ὁ ἅγιος ἐξ ὄρους κατασκίου δασέος Καὶ ὁ ἕτερος Κύριε εἰσακήκοα τὴν ἀκοήν σου καὶ ἐφοβήθην. Κύριε κατενόησα τὰ ἔργα σου καὶ ἐξέστην. Δόξα Χαίρετε προφῆται τίμιοι, Καὶ νῦν Ἰδοὺ καιρὸς ἤγγικε τῆς σωτηρίας ἡμῶν. Ἀπολυτίκια τῶν Πατέρων, Μεγάλα τὰ τῆς πίστεως κατορθώματα, τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἀπεγράφετό ποτε καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
8.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ἀντὶ τοῦ Τριαδικοῦ κανόνος ψάλλεται ὁ μετὰ τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν τῆς κδ΄ κείμενος Κανὼν Κύματι θαλάσσης, εἶτα Δόξα Βολίδες ἀστράπτοντες, Καὶ νῦν Ἄκουε οὐρανὲ (ζήτει ἀμφότερα ἐν τῇ ιη΄ τοῦ μηνός)· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπεγράφετό ποτε καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον τοῦ ἤχου Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Προεόρτιον, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν Ἀναστάσιμα δύο καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Τῶν προφητῶν αἱ ῥήσεις· εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν αὖθις Ἀναστάσιμα δύο καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Αὐλῶν ποιμενικῶν (ζήτει ἀμφότερα ἐν τῇ κδ΄)· εἶτα ἡ Αἴτησις καὶ ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ Κανὼν Κύματι θαλάσσης. Εἰς τὸ πρῶτον

*(Printed Page 258)*

=== LEAF p274 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday before the Nativity of Christ — Situation Two Concl. / Situation Three (p. 259)]

259

the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Pre-feast, that of the Fathers, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Today the Virgin,” Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before the Nativity of Christ. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

SITUATION THREE

7.    If the Sunday before Christ’s Nativity occurs on the 24th of the month, in Vespers we sing none of the Resurrection Hymns, but only those of the Fathers with the Pre-feast as follows: Following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Prosomia Stichira of the Fathers “We celebrate today the memory of the ancestors of Christ,” 4 of the Pre-feast “Let us celebrate, O people the birth” (these are found on December 20), Glory, “Daniel the man of desires,” Now and ever, “Prepare O cave.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Prosomia Stichira “Most immaculate Virgin of God” (these are found in the Vespers of the Sunday before Christmas), the Verses “God shall come from Teman, and the Holy One from the mountain overshadowed by the forest” (Habakkuk 3:3) and the following “O Lord, I have heard the report of You and was afraid. Lord, I considered Your works and was amazed” (Habakkuk 3:1-2) Glory, “Rejoice, O honored prophets,” Now and ever, “Behold, the time of our salvation.” The Apolytikia of the Fathers “Great are the accomplishments of faith,” and of the Pre-feast “Mary once, with aged Joseph, was registered in a census” and Dismissal.
8.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, instead of the Triadic Canon, the Canon “Waves of the sea,” which is found after the Vespers of the 24th, then Glory, “Shining like meteors,” Now and ever, “Listen O heaven” (these are both found in the 18th of the month); the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Mary once, with aged Joseph was registered in a census” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord,” the Apolytikia: of the Resurrection of the Mode, that of the Fathers, that of the Pre-feast; the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata of the first Stichologia: two of the Resurrection and one of the Pre-feast “The sayings of the prophets”; in the second Stichologia, immediately two Resurrection Kathismata and another of the Pre-feast “As shepherds were piping” (these are both found in the 24th of the month); then the Petition and the Ypakoi of the Mode, the

*(Printed Page 259)*

=== LEAF p275 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday before the Nativity Concl. / December 25: Nativity of Christ — Case 1 (p. 260)]

260

Τροπάριον ἑκάστης Ὠδῆς μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν λέγεται στίχος Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ ἀναστάσει σου Κύριε. Εἰς δὲ τὰ λοιπὰ Ἅγιοι τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ ὁ προεόρτιος Κανὼν Χριστὸν σαρκὶ νηπιάσαντα, οὗ ὁ Στίχος Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν Δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Ὑπακοὴ Ἄγγελος παίδων ἐδρόσισε κάμινον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον Χειρόγραφον εἰκόνα καὶ ὁ Οἶκος Ἔκτεινόν σου τὴν χεῖρα. Εἶτα τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς· αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Πατέρων Πατέρων θείων σήμερον καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Εὐφραίνου Βηθλεὲμ καὶ σύ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τὰ τροπάρια Ἄρόν σου τὴν φωνὴν ἀληθῶς εἰς δ΄. Δόξα Τῶν νομικῶν διδαγμάτων ὁ σύλλογος, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

9.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Πατέρων, καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Προεορτίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Προεόρτιον καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΚΕ΄.    Ἡ κατὰ σάρκα Γέννησις τοῦ Κυρίου καὶ Θεοῦ καὶ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Παρασκευῇ, τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωῒ μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Ὄρθρου ἐνδιάτακτον Ἀκολουθίαν, ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Μεγάλων Ὡρῶν καὶ τοῦ Μεγάλου Ἑσπερινοῦ μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Μεγάλου Βασιλείου κατὰ τὴν ἑξῆς διάταξιν.

Ὥρα Α΄.

2.    Μετὰ τὴν Ἀκολουθίαν τοῦ Ὄρθρου, περὶ τὴν α΄ ὥραν τῆς

*(Printed Page 260)*

=== LEAF p276 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday before Nativity Concl. / December 25: Nativity of Christ — Situation One (p. 261)]

261

Anavathmi, and the Prokimenon. The Canon “Waves of the sea.” The Verse of the first hymn of each Ode after the Irmos is “Glory to Your holy Resurrection, O Lord”; for the rest of the hymns we use the Verse “Saints of God.” Also the Canon of the Pre-feast “Christ being an infant in the flesh,” whose Verse is “Glory to You, our God, glory to You.” After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “An angel dampened the fire of the Children”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion “Handwritten icon” and the Ikos “Stretch out Your hand.” Then the Minologion of the Saints of the day and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie “Christ is born,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers “Let us come together, O lovers of the Fathers,” and of the Pre-feast “Rejoice, O Bethlehem.” At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Fathers “In truth raise your voice, O Zion,” Glory, “The collection of Mosaic teachings,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
9.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes from the 3rd Ode of the Canon of the Fathers, and from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Fathers, that of the Pre-feast, that of the Saint of the Church, Kontakion “Today the Virgin.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before the Nativity of Christ. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 25th.    The Nativity in the flesh of our Lord, and God and Savior Jesus Christ.

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Feast occurs on a Friday, Thursday morning after the prescribed Matins Service we sing the Service of the Great Hours and the Great Vespers with the Liturgy of Basil the Great according to the following order.

HOUR ONE

2.    After the Matins Service, around the First Hour of the morning {7

*(Printed Page 261)*

=== LEAF p277 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Royal Hours: First Hour Concl. / Third Hour (p. 262)]

262

πρωΐας (7 π.μ.) κατέρχεται ὁ Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς) ἐν τῷ Ναῷ καὶ εὐλογήσαντος τοῦ Ἱερέως ἄρχεται ὁ Πατριάρχης τὸ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν Δόξα σοι . . . Βασιλεῦ Οὐράνιε Παράκλητε . . . κτλ. ὁ Ἀναγνώστης λέγει τὸ Τρισάγιον, μετὰ δὲ τὸ Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν καὶ εὐθὺς τοὺς ψαλμοὺς τῆς Α΄ ὥρας· εἰς τὸ τέλος Δόξα Πατρί, τὸ Τροπάριον Ἀπεγράφετό ποτε, Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεί, Τί σε καλέσωμεν, ὦ Κεχαριτωμένη; καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλειν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Βηθλεὲμ ἑτοιμάζου. Εἶτα ὁ β΄ Χορὸς τὸν Στίχον Ὁ Θεὸς ἀπὸ Θαιμὰν ἥξει, καὶ ὁ Ἅγιος ἐξ ὄρους κατασκίου δασέος καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Νῦν προφητικὴ πρόρρησις, ὁ α΄ Χορὸς Δόξα, ὁ β΄ Καὶ νῦν, ὁ α΄ Τάδε λέγει Ἰωσὴφ πρὸς τὴν Παρθένον· μετὰ τοῦτο, ὁ α΄ Κανονάρχης ἀναγινώσκει τὴν Προφητείαν καὶ τὸν Ἀπόστολον, εἶτα ὁ Διάκονος Σοφία ὀρθοὶ κτλ. ὁ δὲ Ἱερεὺς πρὸ τῆς ὡραίας Πύλης ἀναγινώσκει τὸ Ἱερὸν Εὐαγγέλιον· μετὰ τὸ τέλος τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου ὁ Ἀναγνώστης εὐθὺς λέγει τὰ διαβήματά μου κατεύθυνον καὶ τὸ Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον· τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Ὁ ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ, τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον γ΄. Δόξα πατρί, Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεί, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβίμ, Ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου, ὁ Πατριάρχης τὸ Ὁ Θεὸς οἰκτιρήσαι ἡμᾶς ἐπισυνάπτων καὶ τὴν εὐχὴν Χριστὲ τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν, εἶτα ἄρχεται εὐθὺς ἡ Γ΄ Ὥρα.

Σημ. Ψαλλομένων τῶν Ἰδιομέλων τῆς Γ΄ Ὥρας ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος (ἢ ὁ Διάκονος, ἢ ἐν ἐλλείψει τούτων ὁ ἀναγνοὺς τὸ Ἱερὸν Εὐαγγέλιον Ἱερεὺς) ἐξέρχεται τῆς βορείου Πύλης τοῦ Ἱεροῦ Βήματος ἐνδεδυμένος μανδύαν μέλανα μετὰ τοῦ θυμιατοῦ (κατζίου) προπορευομένου Λαμπαδούχου, καὶ θυμιᾷ τὸν λαόν. Τοῦτο ἐπαναλαμβάνεται καὶ εἰς τὰς λοιπὰς δύο ὥρας τὴν ς΄ καὶ θ΄ ὑπὸ ἑτέρων Διακόνων.²

Ὥρα Γ΄.

3.    Ὁ Ἀναγνώστης μετὰ τὸ Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν, ἀναγινώσκει τοὺς ψαλμοὺς τῆς Γ΄ Ὥρας καὶ μετὰ τὸ Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ψάλλειν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Οὗτος ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν. Εἶτα ὁ α΄ Χορὸς τὸν Στίχον Κύριε εἰσακήκοα τὴν ἀκοήν σου καὶ ἐφοβήθην καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Πρὸ τῆς γεννήσεως τῆς σῆς, ὁ β΄ Χορὸς Δόξα, ὁ α΄ Καὶ νῦν, ὁ β΄ τὸ

2. Ἀπόντος Ἀρχιερέως θυμιᾷ ὁ Ἱερεὺς ἐνδεδυμένος φελώνιον.

*(Printed Page 262)*

=== LEAF p278 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Royal Hours: First Hour Concl. / Third Hour (p. 263)]

263

a.m.} the Patriarch (or the Archpriest) comes down into the Church, and the Priest having given the blessing, the Patriarch begins “Glory to You our God, glory to you . . . O heavenly King . . . etc.” The Reader says the Trisagion, and after “For Yours is,” “Lord, have mercy (12 times). Glory, Now and ever, “O come let us worship,” and the psalms of the First Hour; at the end Glory the Hymn “Mary once,” Now and ever, “What shall we call you, O full of grace?” and The first Choir chants the Idiomelon “Make ready, O Bethlehem.” Then the second Choir sings the Verse “God shall come from Teman, and the Holy One from the mountain overshadowed by the forest” (Habakkuk 3:3) and the Idiomelon “Now the prophecy,” the first Choir Glory, the second Choir Now and ever the first “Joseph spoke thus to the Virgin.” After this, the Canonarch reads the Prophecy and the Apostolos; then the Deacon “Wisdom arise” etc. and the Priest, before the Royal Gate, reads the Gospel. After the Gospel, the Reader immediately says: “Order my steps” and the Trisagion; the Priest “For Yours is,” and the Kontakion “Today the Virgin”; then “Lord, have mercy” (40 times), “You who at every season,” “Lord, have mercy” (3 times) Glory, Now and ever, “More honorable than the Cherubim” and “In the name of the Lord.” Then the Patriarch says the “May God have pity for us” adding also the prayer “Christ the true light”; then begins immediately the 3rd hour.
    Note: While the Idiomela of the 3rd Hour are being chanted, the Great Archdeacon (or the Deacon or, in the absence of these two, the priest who has read the Holy Gospel), exits from the North Door of the Holy Sanctuary and dressed in a purple robe, carrying a Katzion [hand censer] and preceded by the Lambaduchos (candle carrier), censes the people. This action is repeated by other deacons in the remaining two hours— the 6th and the 9th. ²

HOUR THREE

3.    The Reader, after “O Come, let us worship,” reads the psalms of the 3rd Hour and after “O Theotokos, you are the true vine,” the second Choir chants the Idiomelon “This is our God.” Then the first Choir chants the Verse “Lord, I have heard the report of You and was afraid” and the Idiomelon “Before your birth”; the second Choir Glory, the first Choir Now and ever and the second the Idiomelon “Tell us, Joseph.” Then the

2. In the absence of a Hierarch, the Priest censes, robed in a Phelonion

*(Printed Page 263)*

=== LEAF p279 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Royal Hours: Third Hour Concl. / Sixth & Ninth Hours (p. 264)]

264

Ἰδιόμελον Ἰωσὴφ εἰπὲ ἡμῖν. Εἶτα λέγεται ὑπὸ τοῦ β΄ Κανονάρχου ἡ Προφητεία καὶ ὁ Ἀπόστολος, καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον κτλ. κατὰ τὴν ἀνωτέρω ἐν § 2 διάταξιν· μετὰ δὲ τὴν εὐχὴν τῆς Γ΄ Ὥρας Δέσποτα Θεὲ, ἄρχεται ἡ ς΄ Ὥρα.

Ὥρα ς΄.

4.    Ὁ Ἀναγνώστης μετὰ τὸ Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν, ἀναγινώσκει τοὺς ψαλμοὺς τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας καὶ μετὰ τὸ Ὅτι οὐκ ἔχομεν παρρησίαν, ἄρχεται ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλειν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δεῦτε πιστοὶ ἐπαρθῶμεν ἐνθέως, εἶτα ὁ β΄ Χορὸς τὸν Στίχον Κύριε εἰσακήκοα τὴν ἀκοήν σου καὶ ἐφοβήθην καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἄκουε Οὐρανὲ, ὁ α΄ Χορὸς Δόξα Καὶ νῦν, ὁ β΄ καὶ α΄ Χορὸς τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δεῦτε Χριστοφόροι λαοὶ, μετὰ τοῦτο ὁ Κανονάρχης τὴν Προφητείαν καὶ τὸν Ἀπόστολον, καὶ ὁ Ἱερεὺς τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· μετὰ δὲ τὴν εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας Θεὲ καὶ Κύριε τῶν δυνάμεων, ἄρχεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὥρα.

Ὥρα Θ΄.

5.    Ὁ Ἀναγνώστης Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν γ΄ καὶ τοὺς ψαλμοὺς τῆς Θ΄ Ὥρας· μετὰ δὲ τὸ Ὁ δι’ ἡμᾶς γεννηθείς, ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ψάλλειν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἐξεπλήττετο ὁ Ἡρώδης, εἶτα ὁ α΄ Χορὸς τὸν Στίχον Ὁ Θεὸς ἀπὸ Θαιμὰν ἥξει καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ὅτε Ἰωσὴφ, Παρθένε, τὸ τέλος τοῦ Ἰδιομέλου Σὺν Πατρὶ καὶ ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι λαμβάνει ὁ β΄ Χορὸς· ὁ δὲ α΄ ἄρχεται τοῦ Δόξα πατρὶ, ὁ β΄ Χορὸς λέγει τὸ Καὶ νῦν ὁ δὲ Κανονάρχης ἱστάμενος ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ βλέπων πρὸς ἀνατολὰς ἀναγινώσκει εὐλαβῶς καὶ κατὰ τὸ ὕφος τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Σήμερον γεννᾶται ἐκ Παρθένου ὁ δρακὶ τὴν πᾶσαν ἔχων κτίσιν, ὃ ἐπαναλαμβάνει τρὶς, εἶτα ἐξακολουθεῖ Ῥάκει καθάπερ βροτὸς κτλ., τὸ δὲ Προσκυνοῦμέν σου τὴν γέννησιν Χριστὲ ἐπαναλαμβάνει ἐπίσης τρὶς, τὸ Δεῖξον ἡμῖν καὶ τὰ θεῖά σου θεοφάνεια ἅπαξ, καὶ τότε ἄρχονται οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλειν τὸ Σήμερον γεννᾶται ἐκ Παρθένου ἀργῶς καὶ μετὰ μέλους· μετὰ τοῦτο ὁ Κανονάρχης λέγει τὴν Προφητείαν καὶ τὸν Ἀπόστολον καὶ ὁ Ἱερεὺς τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· μετὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς Θ΄ Δέσποτα Κύριε Ἰησοῦ Χριστὲ, γίνεται Ἀπόλυσις³. καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ Μέγας Ἑσπερινὸς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Μεγάλου Βασιλείου.

3. Μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς Θ΄ ἡ τάξις ἀπαιτεῖ τὰ Τυπικὰ, χῦμα, ἤτοι τὰ Εὐλόγει ἡ ψυχή μου, αἴνει ἡ ψυχή μου καὶ τοὺς Μακαρισμοὺς καὶ τελευταῖον τὴν Ἀπόλυσιν· ἀλλ’ ἐπειδὴ χάριν συντομίας συνειθίσθη ἤδη ἡ παράλειψις αὐτῶν, διὰ τοῦτο ἐσημειώθη ἀνωτέρω μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν ἡ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 264)*

=== LEAF p280 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Royal Hours: Third Hour Concl. / Sixth & Ninth Hours (p. 265)]

265

second Canonarch reads the Prophecy and the Apostolos, and the Priest reads the Gospel, etc., as outlined in Paragraph 2 above; after the Prayer of the 3rd Hour “O God the Master,” the 6th Hour begins.

HOUR SIX

4.    The Reader, after “O Come, let us worship,” reads the psalms of the 6th Hour and after “As there is no boldness in us,” the first Choir chants the Idiomelon “Come, O you faithful, inspired by God.” Then the second Choir chants the Verse “Lord, I have heard the report of You and was afraid” and the Idiomelon “Hearken, O heaven”; the first Choir Glory, the second Choir Now and ever then the first Choir the Idiomelon “Come you people, bearers of Christ.” After this the Canonarch reads the Prophecy and the Apostolos, and the Priest reads the Gospel; after the Prayer of the 6th Hour “O God the Lord of hosts,” the 9th Hour begins.

HOUR NINE

5.    The Reader, after “O Come, let us worship” (3 times), reads the psalms of the 9th Hour; after “O good Lord, for our sakes you were born of a Virgin,” the second Choir chants the Idiomelon “Herod was struck with amazement,” then the first Choir the Verse “God shall come from Teman, and the Holy One from the mountain overshadowed by the forest” and the Idiomelon “O Virgin, when Joseph”; the second Choir sings the conclusion of the hymn “With the Father and the Holy Spirit”; the first Choir begins Glory, the second Choir says Now and ever. Then, the Canonarch, standing in the middle of the Church and looking towards the East, recites piously and with the style of the Gospel [recitative] the Idiomelon “Today is born of a Virgin he who holds the whole creation” (3 times); he then continues “He is wrapped in swaddling” etc. The Verse “We worship your birth O Christ” (3 times) and then “Show us also your divine Epiphany” (once). Then the Choirs chant “Today is born of a Virgin” slowly and with melody. After this the Canonarch recites the Prophecy and the Apostolos, and the Priest recites the Gospel; after the Prayer of the 9th Hour “O Master and Lord, Jesus Christ,” follows the Dismissal.³ Then the Great Vespers with the Liturgy of Basil the Great begins.

3. After the Prayer of the 9th [Hour] the order calls for the Typika to be read, that is, “Bless the Lord, O my soul” [Psalm 102 LXX, 103 RSV] “Praise the Lord” [Psalm 145 LXX, 146 RSV] the Beatitudes and finally the Dismissal. But since, in order to shorten the service it is already the practice to omit these (the Typika and the Beatitudes), for this reason, as noted above, the Prayer [of the 9th Hour] is followed by the Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 265)*
