=== LEAF p101 ===
[Original Greek Text: Matins — Concerning the Theotokia of the Praises (cont.), Concerning the Doxology, Concerning the Sunday Matins Apolytikion (p. 86)]

86

τῶν πρώτων τεσσάρων Κυριακῶν τοῦ Τριῳδίου, μετὰ τὸ Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. ῎Αν ἡ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ συμπέσῃ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων ἢ τῇ Μ. Πέμπτῃ, μετὰ τὸ Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἂν δὲ τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα ἢ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου ἑβδομάδος, Δόξα τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα.
   Θεωροῦμεν περιττὸν σημειῶσαι ὅτι ἐν μνήμαις Ἁγίων συμπιπτόντων ἄλλαις ἡμέραις πλὴν τῆς Κυριακῆς καὶ ἐκτὸς τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, ἄν μὴ ὑπάρχῃ ἡ σύμπτωσις προεορτίων ἢ μεθεόρτων, Καὶ νῦν λέγεται εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους μετὰ τὸ Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Θεοτοκίον σύμφωνον τῷ ἤχῳ τοῦ Δοξαστικοῦ, ἐξ ἐκείνων, ἅτινα οὐ λέγονται ταῖς Κυριακαῖς.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΗΣ ΔΟΞΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ

34.    Κατὰ πᾶσαν Κυριακὴν καὶ πᾶσαν Δεσποτικὴν καὶ Θεομητορικὴν ἑορτὴν καὶ τὰς μνήμας τῶν ἑορταζομένων Ἁγίων, ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ ψάλλεται ἡ λεγομένη Μεγάλη Δοξολογία εἰς ἦχον τοῦ Δοξαστικοῦ, τὰς δὲ καθημερινάς, τὰς νηστησίμους ἡμέρας καὶ τὰς πρώτας πέντε ἡμέρας τῆς Μ. ἑβδομάδος ἤτοι ἀπὸ τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς Μ. Δευτέρας μέχρι τοῦ τῆς Μ. Παρασκευῆς λέγεται χῦμα ἡ μικρὰ Δοξολογία Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει, μεθ’ ἣν ἕπεται ἡ Ἐκτενὴς καὶ τὰ Ἀπόστιχα. Ἐν ὅλῃ τῇ Διακαινησίμῳ ἑβδομάδι, ὡς καὶ ἐν τῇ Ἀποδόσει τοῦ Πάσχα Δοξολογία οὐ ψάλλεται ἀλλὰ μετὰ τὸ Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρὶς κατὰ τὸ σύνηθες αὐτοῦ μέλος, καὶ τοῦτο ἐπέχει τὸν τόπον τῆς Δοξολογίας καὶ τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΑΠΟΛΥΤΙΚΙΟΥ ΤΟΥ ΟΡΘΡΟΥ ΤΗΣ ΚΥΡΙΑΚΗΣ
ΣΗΜΕΡΟΝ ΣΩΤΗΡΙΑ

35.    Κατὰ πᾶσαν Κυριακήν, καὶ ἂν συμπέσῃ Θεομητορικὴ ἑορτή, ἢ Ἀπόδοσις Δεσποτικῆς ἢ Θεομητορικῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὰς μεθεόρτους Κυριακάς, τὰς Κυριακὰς τοῦ Τριῳδίου (πλὴν τῆς τῶν Βαΐων) καὶ τὰς μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Θωμᾶ τέσσαρας Κυριακὰς τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, ὡς καὶ τὸ Σάββατον τοῦ Λαζάρου μετὰ τὴν Δοξολογίαν ψάλλεται εἰς τὸν ἦχον τῆς ἡμέρας τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς Κυριακῆς

*(Printed Page 86)*

=== LEAF p102 ===
[English Facing Translation: Matins — Concerning the Theotokia of the Praises (cont.), Concerning the Doxology, Concerning the Sunday Matins Apolytikion (p. 87)]

87

Triodion, after the Glory of the Triodion, the Now and ever is that of the Feast. If the Feast of the Annunciation occurs on the Saturday of Lazarus, Palm Sunday, or Holy Thursday, after the Glory of the Triodion, we chant the Now and ever of the Feast; if on Pascha {Easter} Sunday or any other day of Bright Week, we chant Glory of the Feast, Now and ever “It is the day of Resurrection.”
   We deem it redundant to note that on commemorations of Saints occurring on other days except Sunday and outside of the Pentikostarion period, if no Pre-feast or Post-feast coincides, then, after the Glory of the Praises of the Saint, for Now and ever is chanted a Theotokion in the same Mode as the Doxastikon taken from those Theotokia which are not chanted on Sundays {but only on weekdays}.

CONCERNING THE DOXOLOGY

34.    On every Sunday and every Feast of the Lord and of the Theotokos and the feasts of celebrating Saints, in Matins is chanted the so-called Great Doxology in the Mode of the Doxastikon {of the Praises}. On weekdays, during Lent and on the first five days of Holy Week, that is, from the Matins of Holy Monday to that of Holy Friday the Small or Lesser Doxology “To You belong glory” is read, after which the Petitions and the Aposticha follow. During all of Bright Week as well as on the Leave-taking of Easter, the Doxology is not chanted; but after “It is the day of Resurrection,” “Christ is risen,” chanted three times with its usual melody, takes the place of the Doxology and the Apolytikion {that follows the Doxology}.

CONCERNING THE APOLYTIKION OF
THE MATINS OF SUNDAY
TODAY IS THE DAY OF SALVATION

35.    On every Sunday, even if there occurs a Feast of the Theotokos, or the Leave-taking of a Feast of the Lord or the Theotokos, and on the Post-feast Sundays, the Sundays of the Triodion (except Palm Sunday) and the four Sundays of the Pentikostarion following the Sunday of Thomas, as well as the Saturday of Lazarus, after the Doxology, the Apolytikion of Sunday Matins “Today salvation has come to the world” is sung in the Mode of the day. On Feasts of the Lord or the Theotokos and the commemorations of

*(Printed Page 87)*

=== LEAF p103 ===
[Original Greek Text: Matins — Concerning the Sunday Matins Apolytikion (cont.) (p. 88)]

88

Σήμερον σωτηρία· κατὰ δὲ τὰς ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τῆς ἑβδομάδος τυχούσας Θεομητορικὰς καὶ Δεσποτικὰς ἑορτὰς καὶ τὰς τῶν ἑορταζομένων Ἁγίων μνήμας ψάλλεται τὸ ἰδιαίτερον ἑκάστης ἑορτῆς Ἀπολυτίκιον, καὶ ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Ὄρθρου, καθ’ ὅλην δὲ τὴν Διακαινήσιμον ἑβδομάδα καὶ τὴν Ἀπόδοσιν τοῦ Πάσχα τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ἀναπληροῖ καὶ τὴν Δοξολογίαν (καὶ) τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον. Ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Θωμᾶ μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Πάσχα (ἐξαιρουμένων τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς) καὶ ἑορταζόμενος Ἅγιος ἂν τύχῃ ἐν ἄλλῃ πλὴν τῆς Κυριακῆς ἡμέρᾳ, Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Ὄρθρου ψάλλεται τὸ τῆς προλαβούσης Κυριακῆς. Σημειωτέον δὲ ὅτι μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως ἑκάστης Δεσποτικῆς καὶ Θεομητορικῆς ἑορτῆς καθ’ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Ὄρθρου ψάλλεται τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀπολυτίκιον, ὡς καὶ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ καὶ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ (§15). Ἀλλὰ τὰς καθημερινάς, ἄν μὴ προηγῆται Δεσποτικὴ καὶ Θεομητορικὴ ἑορτή, ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Ὄρθρου λέγεται τὸ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου, ὅπερ εὑρίσκεται ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ.

*(Printed Page 88)*

=== LEAF p104 ===
[English Facing Translation: Matins — Concerning the Sunday Matins Apolytikion (cont.) (p. 89)]

89

celebrating Saints occurring on a weekday, we chant the Apolytikion particular to each feast; and, at the end of Matins, during all of Bright Week and on the Leave-taking of Easter, “Christ is Risen” takes the place of both the Doxology {and} the Apolytikion. From the Sunday of Thomas to the Leave-taking of Easter (with the exception of the Post-feast of Mid-Pentecost), and even if a celebrating Saint occurs on any day other than Sunday, the Apolytikion chanted at the end of Matins is that of the previous Sunday. Note that, until the Leave-taking of each Feast of the Lord and of the Theotokos, on each day at the end of Matins, the Apolytikion of the Feast is chanted, as well as in Vespers and in the Liturgy (see Paragraph 15). But on the weekdays when no Feast of the Lord or the Theotokos takes precedence, at the end of Matins, we chant the Theotokion in the Mode of the Apolytikion, {both of} which are found in the {Great} Orologion.

*(Printed Page 89)*

=== LEAF p105 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Typika and the Beatitudes, Concerning the Antiphons (p. 90)]

90

Η ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΩΝ ΤΥΠΙΚΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΤΩΝ ΜΑΚΑΡΙΣΜΩΝ

36.    Κατὰ πᾶσαν Κυριακὴν ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ ψάλλονται ἀπαραιτήτως τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ μετὰ τῶν ὀκτὼ Ἀναστασίμων τῆς Ὀκτωήχου Τροπαρίων· ὅταν δὲ ἐν Κυριακῇ τύχωσι προεόρτια ἢ μεθέορτα Δεσποτικῶν καὶ Θεομητορικῶν ἑορτῶν, ἢ καὶ μνῆμαι ἑορταζομένων Ἁγίων, ψάλλονται πρὸς τοῖς τέσσαρσι τῶν Μακαρισμῶν Τροπαρίοις, καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ϛ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς τυχούσης ἑορτῆς, ἢ τοῦ τυχόντος Ἁγίου.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΩΝ ΑΝΤΙΦΩΝΩΝ

37.    Κατὰ πάσας τὰς Δεσποτικὰς ἑορτὰς ψάλλονται τὰ Ἀντίφωνα αὐτῶν μετὰ τῶν καταλλήλων στίχων ἐν οἱᾳδήποτε ἡμέρᾳ καὶ ἂν τύχωσιν· ἀλλ’ ἄν αἱ Ἀποδόσεις αὐτῶν τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ, δεύτερον Ἀντίφωνον ψάλλεται τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς χαρακτηριστικὸν καὶ οὐχὶ τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον. Ὅταν δὲ τύχῃ Θεομητορικὴ ἑορτὴ ἐν Κυριακῇ ἢ καὶ Ἀπόδοσις αὐτῆς, τὸ δεύτερον Ἀντίφωνόν ἐστι τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν· ἀλλ’ ἄν τύχῃ ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ, τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνόν ἐστι Σῶσον . . . ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, τῇ δὲ ἑορτῇ τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς Ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ δικαίου Συμεὼν βασταχθείς, καὶ τῇ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ, Ὁ δι’ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθείς. Τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα εἴθισται νῦν ἵνα ψάλλωνται ἀπαραλλάκτως καθ’ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως· καίτοι τὰ ἀρχαῖα Τυπικὰ ἀπὸ τῆς Κυρ. τοῦ Ἀντιπάσχα διατάττουσιν ἔναρξιν τῶν Τυπικῶν καὶ Μακαρισμῶν, καὶ ἀντὶ Εἰσοδικοῦ ὁρίζουσι τὸ Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν. Ἐν ταῖς μνήμαις τῶν ἑορταζομένων Ἁγίων ἐν οἱᾳδήποτε ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἑβδομάδος καὶ ἂν τύχωσιν, ἀπαραιτήτως ἐπιβάλλονται τὰ Τυπικά, καθόσον στίχους Ἀντιφώνων οἱ Ἅγιοι οὐκ ἔχουσιν. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς καθημεριναῖς Λειτουργίαις ψάλλονται τὰ Ἀντίφωνα Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ . . . Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου . . . τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν . . .

*(Printed Page 90)*

=== LEAF p106 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Typika and the Beatitudes, Concerning the Antiphons (p. 91)]

91

THE LITURGY

CONCERNING THE TYPIKA
AND THE BEATITUDES

36.    On every Sunday in the Liturgy are sung indispensably the Typika and the Beatitudes with the eight Resurrection Hymns of the Octoichos. When a Sunday is a Pre-feast or Post-feast of any Feasts of the Lord or the Theotokos, or if the commemorations of celebrating Saints fall on Sunday, four hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast or of the Saint are chanted in addition to the four Hymns of the Beatitudes.

CONCERNING THE ANTIPHONS

37.    On all of the Lord's Feasts, their Antiphons are chanted together with their appropriate verses, no matter on which day these Feasts may occur. But if their Leave-takings occur on a Sunday, the second Antiphon is sung with the phrase characteristic of the Feast and not with that of the Resurrection. When either a Feast of the Theotokos or its Leave-taking occurs on a Sunday, the second Antiphon is that of the Resurrection “Save us, O Son of God, who is risen from the dead.” But if either one of them occurs on any other day, the second Antiphon is “Save us ... who are wondrous in your saints”; on the Feast of the Lord's Presentation “... carried in the arms of Simeon the righteous”; and on the Feast of the Annunciation “... incarnate for our sake.” The Antiphons of Pascha [Easter] are now chanted, by custom, unchanged on every day until the Leave-taking of Pascha [Easter], even though the ancient typika prescribe the use of the Typika and the Beatitudes to begin on the Sunday of Thomas, and, instead of the Isodikon [Entrance Hymn] they prescribe the “O come let us worship ... who is risen from the dead.” On the commemorations of celebrating Saints, no matter on which day of the week they may occur, the Typika are prescribed as indispensable, since the Saints have no verses for their Antiphons. In weekday Liturgies, the following Antiphons are sung: the first Antiphon “It is good to confess to the Lord ... Through the intercessions of the Theotokos ...”; the second Antiphon

*(Printed Page 91)*

=== LEAF p107 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Antiphons (cont.), Concerning the Entrance Hymns [Isodika] in the Liturgy (p. 92)]

92

Πρεσβείαις τῶν Ἁγίων σου σῶσον ἡμᾶς Κύριε, τὸ γ΄ Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα τῷ Κυρίῳ . . . Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, (῎Ιδε αὐτὰ τὰ Ἀντίφωνα ἐν τῇ Ἰδιαιτέρᾳ Διατάξει τῆς καθ’ ἡμέραν Ἀκολουθίας).

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΩΝ ΕΝ ΤΗι ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑι ΕΙΣΟΔΙΚΩΝ

38.    Κατὰ πᾶσαν Κυριακὴν καὶ κατὰ πᾶσαν Θεομητορικὴν ἑορτὴν εἰς τὴν Εἴσοδον ψάλλεται τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν καὶ προσπέσωμεν Χριστῷ, Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, ψάλλοντάς σοι Ἀλληλούϊα. Ἐξαιροῦνται αἱ δύο Θεομητορικαὶ ἑορταί, ἡ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ καὶ ἡ τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς, ὅταν τύχωσιν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, διότι ψάλλονται μὲν τὰ Εἰσοδικὰ αὐτῶν, ἀλλ’ ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Εἰσοδικοῦ λέγεται τὸ Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν· ἐπίσης καὶ ἐν ταῖς Ἀποδόσεσι12 τῶν δύο τούτων ἑορτῶν, ὅταν τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ. Δεσποτικῶν ὅμως ἑορτῶν Ἀποδόσεις ἄν τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ, λέγονται τὰ Εἰσοδικὰ αὐτῶν, ἀλλὰ πάλιν μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν. Τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ τυχούσης τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, Εἰσοδικὸν ψάλλεται τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀλλ’ ἐν τῷ Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . λέγεται Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν· τυχούσης τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων ἢ τῇ Μ. Πέμπτῃ, Ἀντίφωνα καὶ Εἰσοδικὸν λέγονται τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ· εἰ δὲ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ταῖς ἑξῆς τρισὶν ἡμέραις τῆς Διακαινησίμου, Ἀντίφωνα λέγονται τὰ τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀλλ’ ἐν τῷ Σῶσον ἡμᾶς λέγεται Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, Ἐν ταῖς μνήμαις τῶν ἑορταζομένων Ἁγίων ὡς καὶ καθ’ ὁποιανδήποτε ἄλλην πλὴν τῆς Κυριακῆς ἡμέραν ἄν τελῆται λειτουργία, Εἰσοδικὸν ψάλλεται τὸ Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν καὶ προσπέσωμεν Χριστῷ, Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστὸς κτλ.

________________________
12. Καίτοι, ὡς γνωστόν, ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ Ἀπόδοσιν κυρίως εἰπεῖν οὐκ ἔχει· ἄν ὅμως συμπέσῃ ἡ κυρία τῆς ἑορτῆς ἡμέρα ἐν Παρασκευῇ ἢ Σαββάτῳ παρατείνεται ἡ Ἀπόδοσις καὶ τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν, ὡς φαίνεται ἐν ταῖς περιπτώσεσι τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ.

*(Printed Page 92)*

=== LEAF p108 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Antiphons (cont.), Concerning the Entrance Hymns [Isodika] in the Liturgy (p. 93)]

93

“The Lord is king ... Through the intercessions of the Saints, Lord, save us”; and the third Antiphon “Come let us rejoice in the Lord ... Save us, ... who are wondrous in your Saints.” (For the form and use of these Antiphons, see the Order of Weekday Services, Pg. [Violakis pg. 46] Paragraph 2.)

CONCERNING THE ENTRANCE HYMNS
[ISODIKA] IN THE LITURGY

38.    On every Sunday and on every Feast of the Theotokos, at the {Small} Entrance is chanted the Isodikon “Come let us worship and bow down before Christ. Save us, O Son of God, who is risen from the dead, who sing to you. Alleluia.” Excepted are the two Feasts of the Theotokos — the Annunciation and the Presentation in the Temple — when they occur on a Sunday, because their own specific Isodika are chanted, but, at the end of each Isodikon, we chant “Save us, O Son of God, who is risen from the dead.” Also {the same format of the Isodikon is used} on the Leave-takings of these two Feasts of the Theotokos¹², if they occur on a Sunday. On the Leave-takings of Feasts of the Lord, however, if they fall on a Sunday, the Isodika of their own Feast are sung, but again with the ending “... who is risen from the dead.” If the Feast of the Annunciation occurs on the Saturday of Lazarus, the Isodikon chanted is that of the Feast, but at “Save us” we say “who is risen from the dead”; if the Feast occurs on Palm Sunday or Holy Thursday, the Antiphons and the Isodikon are those of the Feast of the Annunciation; if the Feast occurs on Easter Sunday and the following three days of Bright Week, the Antiphons are those of Pascha [Easter] and the Isodikon that of the Feast of the Annunciation, but at “Save us” we say “who is risen from the dead.” On the commemorations of celebrating Saints as well as on any day other than Sunday, if a Liturgy is celebrated, the Isodikon chanted is “O Come let us worship and fall down before Christ. Save us, O Son of God, who are wondrous in your saints, etc.”

________________________
12. As is known, the Feast of the Annunciation does not have, strictly speaking, a Leave-taking; if, however, the day of this Feast falls on Friday or Saturday, the Leave-taking is moved to the next day, as is apparent in the various Situations of the Feast of the Annunciation.

*(Printed Page 93)*

=== LEAF p109 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Entrance Hymns (cont.), Concerning the Apolytikia after the Entrance (p. 94)]

94

   Σημειωτέον δὲ ὅτι, ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Πάσχα μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, εἴθισται νῦν, οὐχὶ τόσῳ ἀκριβῶς, ψάλλεσθαι τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐν ἐκκλησίαις εὐλογεῖτε τὸν Θεόν . . . Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν κτλ. Ὡσαύτως καὶ ἐν πάσαις ταῖς μεθεόρτοις ἡμέραις τῶν Δεσποτικῶν ἑορτῶν (ἐξαιρουμένης τῆς ἐν τῷ μεταξὺ τούτων συμπιπτούσης Κυριακῆς) μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως καθ’ ἑκάστην Λειτουργίαν λέγονται μὲν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα, οὐχὶ δὲ καὶ τὰ Εἰσοδικὰ τῶν ἑορτῶν, ἀλλὰ τὸ Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν μετὰ τοῦ χαρακτηριστικοῦ τῆς ἑορτῆς.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΩΝ ΜΕΤΑ ΤΗΝ ΕΙΣΟΔΟΝ
ΑΠΟΛΥΤΙΚΙΩΝ

39.    Ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον ψάλλεται τὸ ἀναστάσιμον τοῦ ἤχου Ἀπολυτίκιον, ὃ καὶ προηγεῖται πάντοτε τῶν Ἀπολυτικίων τῶν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ συμπιπτουσῶν Θεομητορικῶν ἑορτῶν, ὡς καὶ τῶν Ἀπολυτικίων τῶν Δεσποτικῶν ἑορτῶν, ὅταν αἱ Ἀποδόσεις αὐτῶν συμπίπτωσιν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ. Ἐν μεθεόρτῳ Κυριακῇ ὡς καὶ ἐν Ἀποδόσει Δεσποτικῆς ἢ Θεομητορικῆς ἑορτῆς, ἄν συμπέσῃ μνήμη Ἁγίου ἑορταζομένου, πρῶτον ψάλλεται τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, δεύτερον τὸ τῆς τυχούσης ἑορτῆς, τρίτον τὸ τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου καὶ ἀκολούθως τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Ὡσαύτως ὅταν ἐν ἡμέραις μεθεόρτοις συμπίπτῃ Ἁγίου ἑορταζομένου μνήμη, πρῶτον ψάλλεται τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀπολυτίκιον, εἶτα τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ἀκολούθως τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Καὶ ὅταν ἐντὸς τῶν ἡμερῶν τῆς ἑβδομάδος ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Θωμᾶ μέχρι τῆς Ἀναλήψεως τύχωσιν Ἁγίων ἑορταζομένων μνῆμαι, πρῶτον ψάλλεται τὸ τῆς προλαβούσης Κυριακῆς Ἀπολυτίκιον, εἶτα τὸ τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου, καὶ ἀκολούθως τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Ἐν ταῖς καθημεριναῖς μεθεόρτοις Δεσποτικῆς ἢ Θεομητορικῆς ἑορτῆς (καθ’ ἃς δηλονότι οὐ συμπίπτει ἑορταζόμενος Ἅγιος) μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον ψάλλεται τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον μόνον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Εἰ δὲ τύχοι ὁ Ἅγιος τῆς ἡμέρας ἐκ τῶν Μεγαλομαρτύρων, κἂν μὴ ἑορτάζηται ἐπισήμως ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας, οὐδόλως παραλείπεται τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον αὐτοῦ μετὰ τὸ τῆς τυχούσης ἑορτῆς καὶ ἕπεται ὕστερον τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ.
   Σημειωτέον ὅτι μνημοσύνου τελουμένου ἐν Κυριακῇ, λέγεται πρὸ τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, τὸ τῶν κεκοιμημένων Μνήσθητι Κύριε ὡς ἀγαθός . . . .

*(Printed Page 94)*

=== LEAF p110 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Entrance Hymns (cont.), Concerning the Apolytikia after the Entrance (p. 95)]

95

   Note that, from Easter Sunday until the Leave-taking of Pascha {Easter}, it has now become the custom — though not so correct — to sing the Isodikon “In the Churches bless God ... Save us O Son of God who is risen from the dead etc.” Similarly, on all Post-feast days of a Lord’s Feast (except for any intervening Sunday) to its Leave-taking even in the Liturgy, we do not chant the Antiphons of the Feast nor the Isodika of the Feast, but instead, “Come let us worship” with the phrase characteristic of that Feast.

CONCERNING THE
APOLYTIKIA AFTER THE {SMALL} ENTRANCE

39.    On Sundays, after the [Small] Entrance, we sing the Resurrection Apolytikion of the Mode, which always precedes the Apolytikia of Feasts of the Theotokos occurring on Sunday as well as the Apolytikia of Feasts of the Lord when their Leave-takings fall on Sundays. On a Post-feast Sunday as well as on the Leave-taking of a Feast of the Lord or the Theotokos, if the commemoration of a celebrating Saint should occur, first is chanted the Resurrection Apolytikion, second that of the Feast, third that of the Saint, and finally that of the Saint of the Church. Similarly, when the commemoration of a celebrated Saint occurs on any Post-feast day, first is chanted the Apolytikion of the Feast, then that of the Saint, and finally that of the Saint of the Church. And when commemorations of celebrating Saints occur within the days of the week from the Sunday of Thomas to the Feast of the Ascension, first is sung the Apolytikion of the preceeding Sunday, then that of the celebrating Saint, and finally that of the Saint of the Church. On the weekdays of the Post-feast periods of either a Feast of the Lord or the Theotokos (that is, with which no celebrating Saint coincides) up to their Leave-takings, after the Entrance, are chanted only the Apolytikion of the Feast, and that of the Saint of the Church. If the Saint of the day is one of the Great Martyrs, even if he is not formally celebrated by the Church, his Apolytikion after the Apolytikion of the Feast should never be omitted; and then finally the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church is chanted.
   Note that, when a Memorial Service is performed on a Sunday, before the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church is chanted the Apolytikion of those fallen asleep [deceased] “Remember, O Lord, as a good one ....”

*(Printed Page 95)*
