=== LEAF p1041 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Creed Concluded – Cuffs – Deacon Part 1) (p. 1026 / TD-47)]

TD-47

Orthodox Christian entering the communion of the Orthodox Church. In the same way, the creed became part of the life of Orthodox Christians and an essential element of the Divine Liturgy of the Orthodox Church at which each person formally and officially accepts and renews his baptism and membership in the Church. Thus, the Symbol of Faith is the only part of the liturgy (repeated in another form just before Holy Communion) which is in the first person. Most other songs and prayers of the liturgy are plural, beginning with “we”. The creedal statement begins with “I,” because faith is at first personal, and only then corporate and communal.

CUFFS (᾿Επιμανίκια, τά): See EPIMANIKIA.

DEACON(S), SECOND, THIRD, etc. (Διάκονος, Δευτερεύων, Τριτεύων, κλπ.) Slav. Diakon:

The Deacon is the third in order of the major orders of clergy in the Orthodox Church, following the BISHOP and the PRIEST. The word deacon meant server and originally it referred to a person who waited on tables.

In the church today, the deacon ministers to the bishop and priest in the divine services and assists in the celebration of the sacraments of the Church. A deacon may not, however, celebrate the sacraments by himself.

With the blessing of the celebrating bishop or priest, the deacon leads the people in the collective prayers and reads from the Holy Scriptures during the divine services. He is also responsible for the decorum of the public worship and calls the people to attention at appropriate times.

In addition, the deacon may perform other tasks related to Church life from time to time with the blessing and at the direction of his bishop or priest. For example, the distribution of alms to the poor, or the distribution of the Eucharist to the faithful from a second chalice at a divine liturgy. The deacon, however, may not consecrate the Holy Gifts.

*(Printed Page TD-47)*

=== LEAF p1042 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Deacon Concluded – Despotikon) (p. 1027 / TD-48)]

TD-48

In the Orthodox Church, the diaconate is not just a step to priesthood; there are many deacons who see it as a permanent office, as a position for full or part time service to the work of the Church.

While, originally deacons of the Church only assisted the bishops in good deeds and works of charity, in more recent centuries the diaconate had become an almost exclusive liturgical function where the deacons only assisted at the celebration of the church services. Today, deacons will often head educational programs and youth groups, perform hospital visitation, missionary work, and conduct social welfare programs.

Sacramentally, all deacons are equal. However, they are ranked and serve by seniority according to the date of their ordination.

Just as with bishops and priests, there are distinctions of administrative rank among deacons. A senior deacon of a cathedral or principal church may be awarded the title PROTODEACON as in the case of St. Stephen, and acquire precedence when serving with other deacons. The chief deacon who primarily serves a bishop is called an ARCHDEACON. A deacon who is also a monastic is called a hierodeacon.

With regard to formal etiquette, for example, in the heading of a letter or when introducing a speaker), one would address or refer to a deacon as “The Rev. Deacon [John Smith].” Deacon is often abbreviated Dcn. or Dn. (though the second is also often used as an abbreviation for dean).

In informal settings, for example, in normal conversation, it is appropriate to simply refer to a deacon as “Deacon [John]” although in some traditions he has been referred to as simply “Father”—for instance, “Father Deacon [John]” or “Father [John].

For a description of the Deacon's vestments, see VESTMENTS.

DESPOTIKON, DESPOTIKA (Δεσποτικόν, τό; Δεσποτικά, τά):

*(Printed Page TD-48)*

=== LEAF p1043 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Despotikon Concluded – Despotis – Deuterocanon – Diakonikon Part 1) (p. 1028 / TD-49)]

TD-49

A hymn or group of hymns singing of God as the Master (Despotis) of all.

DESPOTIS (Δεσπότης, ὁ): See BISHOP.

DEUTEROCANON (ἀναγινωσκώμενα, τά): The Roman Catholic term for the deuterocanonical books of the Bible. These are books considered by the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic Churches to be canonical parts of the Christian Old Testament but are not present in the Hebrew Bible. The word deuterocanonical comes from the Greek meaning “belonging to the second canon.” The etymology of the word is misleading, but it does suggest the hesitation with which these books were accepted into the canon by some theological scholars. Note that the term does not mean non-canonical; despite this it has sometimes been used as a euphemism for the Apocrypha.

Protestant Christians usually do not classify any texts as deuterocanonical; they either omit them from the Bible, or include them in a section designated Apocrypha. The similarity between these different terms contributes to the confusion between the Roman Catholic and Orthodox deuterocanon and the texts considered noncanonical by other groups of Christians.

DIAKONIKON (διακονικόν, τό) Slav. diakonik: The Diakonikon is the name given to a location within the SANCTUARY where many liturgical items are stored by the priest. The icon traditionally placed here is either that of the Resurrection (῾Η ᾿Ανάστασις) or that of the Extreme Humility [of Christ] (ἄκρα ταπείνωσις). It is also here that other icons, which are brought by the faithful to be blessed, are placed for 40 days.

The PROTHESIS, the DIAKONIKON, and the SKEVOPHYLAKION

The SANCTUARY of the Orthodox Church is a holy place, a place where man, by the Grace of God, joins the angels in offering thanksgiving and all glory to our Heavenly Father. Even with this divine character, it remains a very functional place in the church. In other words, the SANCTUARY like the NARTHEX and the NAVE is structured in a manner to best facilitate the needs of those who utilize this

*(Printed Page TD-49)*

=== LEAF p1044 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Diakonikon Concluded – Diataxis Part 1) (p. 1029 / TD-50)]

TD-50

sacred space, the clergy who officiate at Divine Services.

If one were to peer through the central BEAUTIFUL GATE into the Sanctuary, one would find a small marble shelf or table on either side of the back wall. This area on the left is known as the PROTHESIS while that on the right is known as the DIAKONIKON. The unique purpose of these areas in the Sanctuary can best be understood by the differing items that rest upon them and the differing icons that are found immediately behind them.

The PROTHESIS is the place where the Eucharistic Gifts are prepared during the Morning MATINS Service (ORTHROS), prior to the celebration of the Divine Liturgy. Additionally, it is the place where the Eucharistic items, i.e. the Holy Chalice, the Holy PATEN, the communion cloths, the spoon that dispenses the gifts etc., are stored.
On the back wall of the PROTHESIS is traditionally found the icon of the Nativity, reminding us that Christ is the sacrificial lamb that is offered “in behalf of all and for all.”
Early in the Church’s history, these shelves or tables were not found in the Sanctuary. Instead the Holy Gifts were prepared and the liturgical items of the Church were kept in a separate building called the SKEVOPHYLAKION. It was from this place that the Gospel and the Offerings were brought into the Church at the appropriate time in the service by the clergy (our processions today with the Gospel during the Small Entrance and the Offering during the Great Entrance are reminiscent of this practice). The SKEVOPHYLAKION or place for guarding the vessels,” with time, fell into disuse being replaced by the Prothesis and the Diakonikon, now located in the Sanctuary.

DIATAXIS (διάταξις, ἡ): Lit. arrangement, order or provision. Today, as in the middle ages, a Diataxis consists of precise directions for the clergy and chanters conducting the various ceremonial rites of the Greek Orthodox Church. These so-called RUBRICS were originally copied in red ink as opposed to the texts of the documents themselves, which were in black ink. A Patriarchal Diataxis, on the other hand, explains the ritual when the Patriarch himself presided at the Divine Liturgy. These instructions also gave

*(Printed Page TD-50)*

=== LEAF p1045 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Diataxis Part 2: Gemistos Patriarchal Diataxis Abstract) (p. 1030 / TD-51)]

TD-51

the specifics of the various rites of ordination. They also carefully and completely describe the rite of the PROTHESIS (Πρόθεσις) or preparation, performed before the Divine Liturgy but only by a priest and deacon without the participation of the Patriarch.

The following excellent summary by Fr. Alexander Rentel, was taken from http://old.svots.edu/Faculty/Alexander-Rentel/articles/rentel-thesis-abstract.html and is used here with the permission of Fr. Rentel.

“One of the most important extant Patriarchal Diataxes is attributed to a leading figure of the chancery in the second half of the 14th century. The Protonotary (Πρωτονοτάριος), Kyr. Deacon Gemistos (ca. 1397), [later called the MEGA SAKELLARIOS] of the Great and most-holy Church of God. An important note found in the upper margin of f. 3r in Athos Vatopedi 135 (AD 1390), the principle manuscript of the Diataxis, gives a precise date for its composition, August 1386. If indeed Dimitrios Gemistos wrote this Diataxis, this does not mean Gemistos created something entirely new out of nothing. A comparison of his Diataxis with other sources reveals that he composed it utilizing both local and foreign traditions: the traditions of the patriarchal rite in Constantinople and the Athonite Diataxis for the Divine Liturgy by Philotheos Kokkinos (ca. 1300-1377/78), twice patriarch of Constantinople (1353-54, 1364-1376).
The present dissertation presents for the first time ever, a critical edition of Gemistos’ Diataxis as well as an investigation into its liturgical context and an exploration of the historical circumstances surrounding its creation.

Implicit in Anton Baumstark’s famous assertion that it is the nature of liturgy “to relate itself to the concrete situations of times and places,”[1] is the possibility that the historical situation which gave rise to a liturgical document can be deduced from a study of that document. Thus, in the case of Gemistos’ Diataxis, historical currents also emerge through close reading of the text of the Diataxis and a reconstruction of the rites contained therein. Gemistos’ choice of the Philothean Diataxis speaks volumes about the powerful influence of Athonite, hesychast monasticism on the Constantinopolitan

*(Printed Page TD-51)*

=== LEAF p1046 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Diataxis Part 3: Gemistos Diataxis Sources and Philotheos) (p. 1031 / TD-52)]

TD-52

patriarchal throne. Looking beyond the historical situation in which Gemistos’ Diataxis was created, one can already see developing the rough outline of the transformation the Byzantine Church will undergo, one that will allow it to survive through the long centuries of Turkish domination. This is a transformation that will have at its core a strong central patriarchate with a powerful bureaucracy using all the ancient imperial and religious symbols to convey its power.

In order to see these currents at work, the different layers of sources in Gemistos’ Diataxis need to be peeled apart and identified. Then, how he used his sources needs to be examined. Only at this point can we begin to understand why he used the sources he used. In other words, in order to understand what exactly Gemistos himself wrote, what he adapted, and what he inserted into his Diataxis, these sections in Gemistos’ Diataxis which show literary dependence must be further compared with their obvious sources (the Philothean Diataxis, the Euchologion for the ordination rites). An explanation must be found, or at least attempted, to account for their agreement, but also for their differences. The results of this fascinating deconstructing process cast light on the origins of the Diataxis.

The first step in the process of thoroughly analyzing Gemistos’ Diataxis is to untangle the text of the Philothean Diataxis from it and place Gemistos in comparison with this direct ancestor in the Byzantine liturgical Diataxis tradition. Nowhere is Gemistos’ dependency on the Philothean Diataxis more apparent than in the prothesis rite: nearly seventy-five percent of the prothesis rite in Gemistos’ text is taken directly from the Philothean Diataxis either word-for-word or with only superficial modifications. Throughout the rest of his Diataxis, Gemistos used Philotheos’ Diataxis much less, and most of this other material is either original or from another, unknown source. Plainly, one of Gemistos’ reasons for composing his patriarchal Diataxis was to combine the Philothean Diataxis, and especially the prothesis rite from Philotheos’ Diataxis, with the patriarchal rite and Constantinopolitan traditions. So while Gemistos’ desire to incorporate the Philothean Diataxis is clear by his extensive use of the Philothean Diataxis, his motives for doing so are not. Philotheos, after all, was a recently deposed patriarch, someone whose legacy

*(Printed Page TD-52)*

=== LEAF p1047 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Diataxis Part 4: Dimitrios Gemistos Chancery Career) (p. 1032 / TD-53)]

TD-53

was so controversial that his commemoration was forbidden by his immediate successor, Patriarch Makarios. What is more, Philotheos’ Diataxis represents the tradition of Athonite monasticism. Its incorporation within the patriarchal/cathedral liturgical tradition marks its ascendancy, and with it the ascendancy of the monastic tradition, within the larger Byzantine liturgical tradition. But perhaps it is equally a sign that the patriarchal chancery accepted not only Philotheos’ Diataxis as a new liturgical rule, but also marks a rehabilitation of Philotheos by the patriarchate.

A discernible image of Dimitrios Gemistos emerges when the text of his Diataxis is studied and its various sources disentangled and investigated. He was first and foremost a Byzantine Churchman, conservative in nature and fiercely loyal to the Constantinopolitan patriarchate. Gemistos was also a career bureaucrat and began his thirty year career in the patriarchal chancery as a notary under Philotheos sometime in the 1360’s. By the end of his life he had become the Mega Sakellarios, thus proving himself to have been capable and successful. Characteristic of any successful bureaucrat, he was fully conversant with the official terminology of the patriarchate. Equally characteristic is Gemistos’ detailed understanding of the inner workings of the patriarchal bureaucracy, which had its own hierarchy and traditions. The accuracy of his understanding is readily corroborated by a comparison of other extant chancery documents. His mastery of the chancery is not the least bit surprising when we consider that Gemistos worked and flourished in the chancery for twenty years before he wrote his Diataxis. Gemistos’ loyalty to the patriarchate equally extended to individuals who sat on the patriarchal throne. For, as we have seen, even though Gemistos introduced a non-Constantinopolitan source, the Philothean Diataxis, into the Constantinopolitan rite, this was motivated not by a desire to innovate, but by conservatism and loyalty: it was done to settle liturgical questions but also because of his high regard for Philotheos Kokkinos.

The scope of Gemistos’ knowledge was not confined simply to the administrative operations of the patriarchal bureaucracy; he was just as well versed in the liturgical traditions of the

*(Printed Page TD-53)*

=== LEAF p1048 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Diataxis Part 5: Euchologion Fidelity and Hagia Sophia Rites) (p. 1033 / TD-54)]

TD-54

Constantinopolitan Patriarchate. For example, he shows himself more than fluent in the technical vocabulary needed to describe the liturgical rites at the Hagia Sophia. In addition, Gemistos regularly offers in marginal notes alternate formulas which further demonstrate a vast knowledge of liturgical traditions. At times, these asides concern the patriarchal rite and Constantinopolitan traditions, but at other times he notes alternate rubrics for when the patriarch would not be celebrating the liturgy, or if the liturgy would not be celebrated in the “Great Church.”

An examination of Gemistos’ other major source embedded within the Diataxis, the Euchologion, further confirms his fidelity to Constantinopolitan traditions. When the Euchology texts in Gemistos are compared with sources both anterior and contemporary to him, what emerges is that Gemistos indeed remained faithful to the Constantinopolitan Euchology tradition, but, at the same time, he tailored his Euchology sources to the specific liturgical needs of the Hagia Sophia and the elaborate patriarchal rite. Gemistos’ changes, however, demonstrate not an intent to innovate, but rather a conservative inclination that sought to clarify and codify more precisely the liturgical order. At one point he even insists in a curious marginal note that when prevailing customs “seem superfluous” and even “redundant,” it still is far “safer that the prevailing customs be said and maintained,” than the implied threat of their abrogation. Gemistos here is defending the ancient custom of having the subdeacons cry out, “Whoever is faithful (hosoi pistoi)!” twice during the anaphora, an act whose meaning had obviously been lost by Gemistos’ time.

A careful examination of the Diataxis of Dimitrios Gemistos reveals his purposes in composing his Diataxis. Clearly, he wanted to write a patriarchal Diataxis that carefully set forth the role of the patriarch and the members of the patriarchal chancery in the celebration of the Divine Liturgy and the various rites of ordination. A comparison with another Constantinopolitan documents, Euchologia, chancery texts such as the Ekthesis Nea, other Diataxeis, locates Gemistos squarely within the liturgical traditions of Constantinople and the world view of the patriarchate. This is not at all surprising, given Gemistos’ prominence within the Constantinopolitan patriar-

*(Printed Page TD-54)*

=== LEAF p1049 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Diataxis Part 6: Manuscript Transmission and Four Recensions) (p. 1034 / TD-55)]

TD-55

chal chancery, and thus in the Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire. If we refuse to view this Diataxis simply as a liturgical document, it then becomes easy and even necessary for us to read between its lines in order to understand its liturgical and historical context.

Gemistos’ Diataxis exists in nineteen known manuscripts. The manuscripts date from Athos Vatopedi 135, copied in November 1390 shortly after the composition of the Diataxis in August 1386, to Athos Panteleimon 677 (AD 1890). Contained in these manuscripts are four basic recensions of the Diataxis: the longer and original “patriarchal” form of the Diataxis; an abbreviated archival form; a later, “archieratical” redaction; and another abbreviated form that concentrates solely on the rites of the Divine Liturgy. The original patriarchal recension describes the PROTHESIS rites, the vesting of the patriarch, the preliminary rite for metropolitan ordination, the ordination of readers and subdeacons, and then the Divine Liturgy of John Chrysostom. Interspersed within the Liturgy are the rites of metropolitan ordination, priests, and deacons. For all of these rites, the original text contains all the necessary Euchology and diakonika texts. Equally characteristic of the original text of the Diataxis is the presence of detailed instructions for the members of the patriarchal chancery and specific references to the architecture of the Hagia Sophia. The editor of the archival recension has removed all the Euchology and diakonika texts seemingly to conserve paper and space. The patriarchal and archieratical forms of the Diataxis are closely related in form and content. The distinguishing characteristics of the archieratical form are that the celebrant of the Divine Liturgy has been changed from patriarch to archiereus, and that most references to the architecture of the Hagia Sophia have been removed. It would seem that these changes were done so that the Diataxis could be used by other bishops in their own dioceses. The shorter, patriarchal recension of the Diataxis is more radical. Present are references to the patriarch, the Hagia Sophia, and various members of the patriarchal chancery; gone, however, are the rubrics for the prothesis rite along with all the euchology texts. Also present are some elements of the liturgical formulary not yet common to the strictly Constantinopolitan

*(Printed Page TD-55)*

=== LEAF p1050 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Diataxis Part 7: Recension Taxonomy and Editorial Method) (p. 1035 / TD-56)]

TD-56

tradition. The redactor has also displaced all the different ordination rites to a place in the manuscript before the actual text of the Diataxis.

At first glance, the textual issues surrounding the Diataxis of Dimitrios Gemistos seem difficult to resolve. But a curious feature of the textual history of Gemistos’ Diataxis is that subsequent recensions were created in reaction to one or more characteristic element of the original Diataxis. A basic taxonomy of the manuscripts comes quickly into focus through a careful analysis of the various recensions. The very title of the Diataxis states that the Diataxis sets forth the details of the patriarchal Divine Liturgy celebrated in the Great Church (i.e., the Hagia Sophia) and “both how and when the order of ordinations take place.” Therefore, the content of the original text of the Diataxis must contain rubrics specifically for the patriarchal liturgy and the various ordination rites. This content presumed in the title, however, is missing in two recensions, the Archieratical and the Abbreviated Patriarchal “Eucharistic.” Accordingly these two recensions can be described as later and not representative of the original text of the Diataxis. The editor of the Archieratical recension refashioned the Original Patriarchal recension of the Diataxis by changing the main celebrant from patriarch to archiereus and omitting any references to the concelebrating hierarchs, architectural features of the Hagia Sophia, and the members of the patriarchal chancery. By doing this, the redactor of this recension created a Diataxis appropriate to any hierarch and not just the patriarch of Constantinople during the Byzantine Empire. The redactor of the Abbreviated Patriarchal “Eucharistic” recension was no less active. This editor removed the Euchology texts and the diakonika of CHR as well as the texts for the ordination rites, leaving only the rubrics for the celebration of the patriarchal liturgy and mere indications and incipits where these texts once stood.

The guiding editorial principle of the present edition has been to establish as near as possible the text that Gemistos originally wrote and not to create a hypothetical text that never existed. Additionally, no component part of the Diataxis should be seen as anything other than the original text of Gemistos’ Diataxis. In other words, this edition of the Diataxis is not a critical edition of the ordination rites

*(Printed Page TD-56)*
