=== LEAF p281 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Vespers & Liturgy of St. Basil / Matins of the Feast (p. 266)]

266

Ὁ Μέγας Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μεγάλου Βασιλείου.

6.    Ὁ Διάκονος Εὐλόγησον Δέσποτα, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Εὐλογημένη ἡ βασιλεία, ὁ Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς) τὸν Προοιμιακὸν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ δ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα τῷ Κυρίῳ εἰς ς΄. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Αὐγούστου μοναρχήσαντος ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, Εἴσοδος μετὰ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Κανονάρχης τὸ Α΄ Ἀνάγνωσμα Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν, μετὰ τὸ τέλος ἄρχεται ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλειν τὸ Τροπάριον Λαθὼν ἐτέχθης καὶ ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ἐπαναλαμβάνει Καὶ μάγους σοι προσήνεγκεν· τὸ αὐτὸ ἐπαναλαμβάνουσιν ἑκατέρωθεν οἱ Χοροὶ, ἕως οὗ ὁ Κανονάρχης πληρώσῃ τοὺς Στίχους τοῦ ψαλμοῦ· εἶτα ὁ α΄ Χορὸς Δόξα Καὶ νῦν καὶ ψάλλει αὖθις τὸ Τροπάριον ὁλόκληρον. Ἀκολούθως ὁ β΄ Κανονάρχης ἀναγινώσκει τὸ Ζ΄ Ἀνάγνωσμα Παιδίον ἐγεννήθη ἡμῖν, μετὰ τὸ τέλος ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει τὸ Τροπάριον Ἀνέτειλας Χριστὲ ἐκ Παρθένου, τὸ τέλος δὲ καὶ τούτου Μάγους ὁδηγήσας ἐπαναλαμβάνεται ὑπὸ τῶν δύο Χορῶν, ἕως οὗ ὁ Κανονάρχης πληρώσῃ τοὺς Στίχους τοῦ ψαλμοῦ ὡς ἀνωτέρω· εἶτα ὁ β΄ Χορὸς Δόξα Καὶ νῦν ἐπαναλαμβάνων ὁλόκληρον τὸ Τροπάριον, καὶ ὁ α΄ Κανονάρχης ἀναγινώσκει τὸ Η΄ Ἀνάγνωσμα Προέθετο Κύριος λαλῆσαι τῷ Ἄχαζ· μετὰ ταῦτα ἡ μικρὰ Συναπτὴ Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν κτλ. καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Τρισάγιος ὕμνος, ὁ Ἀπόστολος, τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον ἀπ’ Ἄμβωνος ὑπὸ τοῦ Διακόνου· μετὰ τὸ τέλος ὁ Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς) εὐλογεῖ τὸν λαὸν, τῶν Χορῶν ψαλλόντων Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη· εἰδεμὴ, λέγεται τὸ, Δόξα σοι Κύριε, Δόξα σοι καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς ⁴ καὶ ἡ Ἀπόλυσις μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἐν σπηλαίῳ γεννηθεὶς καὶ ἐν φάτνῃ ἀνακληθεὶς διὰ τὴν ἡμῶν σωτηρίαν Χριστὸς ὁ ἀληθινός . . . .
7.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ καὶ τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Ἀπόστιχα (ὡς μὴ ψαλέντα χθές), εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς

4. Τὸ τοῦ Κωνσταντίνου Τυπικὸν ὁρίζει διὰ τὴν ἡμέραν ταύτην τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἡ γέννησίς σου Χριστέ . . . ἀντὶ τοῦ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς· ἀλλ’ οὔτε τὸ ἀρχαῖον Τυπικὸν, οὔτε αἱ ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ τυπικαὶ διατάξεις ἀναφέρουσι τοιοῦτό τι· διὸ καὶ ἐνεκρίθη ἵνα ψάλληται τὸ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς ὅπερ μόνον μετὰ τὴν Λειτουργίαν τῆς κυρίας ἡμέρας ἑκάστης Δεσποτικῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντικαθίσταται διὰ τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου.

*(Printed Page 266)*

=== LEAF p282 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Vespers & Liturgy of St. Basil / Matins of the Feast (p. 267)]

267

Great Vespers and the Liturgy of Basil the Great.

6.    The Deacon: “Bless Master”; the Priest: “Blessed is the Kingdom”; the Patriarch (or the Archpriest): the Introductory Psalm. At “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 4 Idiomela “Come, let us greatly rejoice in the Lord” in 6 (i.e., repeat the first two). Glory, Now and ever, “When Augustus reigned alone on earth.” Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome Light,” and immediately the Canonarch recites the First Reading “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.” At the end, the first Choir sings the Hymn “You were born secretly in a cave,” and the second Choir repeats the refrain “And it brought to you the Magi”; this is repeated by each of the Choirs until the Canonarch has completed the verses of the Psalm; then the first Choir Glory, Now and ever and sings the entire hymn. Then the second Canonarch reads the 7th Reading “For unto us a child is born”; at the end the second Choir sings the Hymn “You have shone forth from a Virgin”; the refrain “You have led the Magi” is repeated by both Choirs until the Canonarch completes the Verses of the psalm as above; then the second Choir Glory, Now and ever and the entire hymn is repeated. Then the first Canonarch reads the 8th Reading “The Lord spoke again to Ahaz”; after this the small Litany “Let us pray to the Lord” etc., and the Trisagios Hymn is sung; the Apostolos, the Alleluia, and the Gospel recited by the Deacon, follows from the Pulpit. At the end, the Patriarch (or the Archpriest) blesses the people, the Choirs singing “Many years”; if not, the Choir sings “Glory to You O Lord, Glory to You.” Then follows the rest of the Liturgy of Basil the Great, Communion Hymn “Praise the Lord,” “We have seen the [true] light,”⁴ and Dismissal with “May He who was born in a cavern and lay in a manger for our salvation, Christ our true God...”
7.    On Friday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti and the Idiomela Aposticha (since they were not sung yesterday); then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the

4. The Typikon of Constantine prescribes for this day the Apolytikion of the Feast “Your birth, O Christ...” instead of “We have seen the light”; but neither the ancient Typikon, nor the rubrics in the Mineon mention such a thing; therefore, it has been approved to sing “We have seen the [true] Light,” which only after the Liturgy of the main day of each Lord's Feast is replaced by the Apolytikion.

*(Printed Page 267)*

=== LEAF p283 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Matins of the Feast Concluded (p. 268)]

268

Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου ἐκ τρίτου, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος Αἰνεῖτε τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, τὰ γ΄ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ Ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἐκ γαστρὸς πρὸ Ἑωσφόρου ἐγέννησά σε, ὤμοσε Κύριος καὶ οὐ μεταμεληθήσεται, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα Τὰ σύμπαντα σήμερον χαρᾶς πληροῦνται, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δόξα ἐν ὑψίστοις Θεῷ (ζήτει ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς ΚΣΤ΄). Οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι ἀνὰ δ΄ Τροπάρια ἄνευ Στίχων, εἰς τὰ δύο τελευταῖα Δόξα Καὶ νῦν· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ χῦμα, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἑορτῆς· αἱ Καταβασίαι διπλαῖ μέχρις η΄ Ὠδῆς, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων ὡς ἑξῆς·

Διὰ τὸν α΄ Κανόνα

Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὴν τιμιωτέραν, καὶ ἐνδοξοτέραν τῶν ἄνω στρατευμάτων.
Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ἐκ τῆς Παρθένου, θεὸν σαρκὶ τεχθέντα.
Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ἐν τῷ Σπηλαίῳ, τεχθέντα βασιλέα.
Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ὑπὸ τῶν Μάγων, θεὸν προσκυνηθέντα.

Διὰ τὸν β΄ Ἰαμβικόν

Σήμερον ἡ Παρθένος, τίκτει τὸν Δεσπότην, ἔνδον ἐν τῷ Σπηλαίῳ.
Σήμερον ὁ Δεσπότης, τίκτεται ὡς βρέφος, ὑπὸ Μητρὸς Παρθένου.
Δόξα, Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τῆς Τρισυποστάτου, καὶ ἀδιαιρέτου, θεότητος τὸ κράτος.
Καὶ νῦν, Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὴν λυτρωσαμένην, ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῆς κατάρας.

Αἱ δύο Καταβασίαι τῆς θ΄, καὶ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ἐπεσκέψατο ἡμᾶς ἐκ γ΄. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Εὐφραίνεσθε, δίκαιοι.

*(Printed Page 268)*

=== LEAF p284 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Matins of the Feast Concluded (p. 269)]

269

Lord”: the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ” (3 times), then the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos “Praise the Name of the Lord” (Psalm 134 LXX, 135 RSV). The three Kathismata are sung in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV, and the Prokimenon “From the womb before the morning star have I begotten you, the lord has sworn and will not repent”; then, “Let everything that has breath” and the Gospel, then Psalm 50 read, Glory, “All things are filled with joy today,” Now and ever repeat the same. The Verse “Have mercy upon me O God” and the Idiomelon “Glory to God in the highest” (this is the Glory of the Vespers of December 26). Both Canons with four hymns each without Verses but at the last two hymns the Verse Glory, Now and ever. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi (read); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos and the Minologion of the Feast. The two Katavasie until the 8th Ode; then the 9th Ode with the Megalynaria is sung as follows:

For the First Canon

Magnify, O my soul, her who is greater in honor and more glorious than the hosts on high.
Magnify, O my soul, God born in the flesh from the Virgin.
Magnify, O my soul, the King born in the cave.
Magnify, O my soul, God worshipped by the Magi.

For the Second Canon (Iambic)

Today the Virgin bears the Master within the cave.
Today the Master is born as a babe of a Virgin Mother.
Glory, Magnify, O my soul, the power of the undivided Godhead in three Persons.
Now and ever,, Magnify, O my soul, her that has delivered us from the curse.
The two Katavasie of the 9th Ode, and the Exapostilarion “Our Saviour,” (3 times). At the Praises: the 4 Idiomela “Make glad, O you

*(Printed Page 269)*

=== LEAF p285 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Praises Concluded & Liturgy Antiphons 1–2 (p. 270)]

270

Δόξα Ὅτε καιρὸς τῆς ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς παρουσίας σου, Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον ὁ Χριστὸς μέχρι τοῦ ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀκαταπαύστως βοῶμεν, καὶ ἄρχεται εὐθὺς ἡ Μεγάλη Δοξολογία, μεθ’ ἣν τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου.

8.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς.

Ἀντίφωνον α΄ Ἦχος β΄

Ἐξομολογήσομαί σοι Κύριε, ἐν ὅλῃ καρδίᾳ μου, διηγήσομαι πάντα τὰ θαυμάσιά σου.
Ἐν βουλῇ εὐθέων καὶ συναγωγῇ, μεγάλα τὰ ἔργα Κυρίου.
Ἐξεζητημένα εἰς πάντα τὰ θεμέλια αὐτοῦ.
Ἐξομολόγησις καὶ μεγαλοπρέπεια τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἡ δικαιοσύνη αὐτοῦ μένει εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος.
(Δόξα Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱῷ καὶ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι· καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν)
Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου κτλ.

Ἀντίφωνον β΄.

Μακάριος ἀνὴρ ὁ φοβούμενος τὸν Κύριον· ἐν ταῖς ἐντολαῖς αὐτοῦ θελήσει σφόδρα.
Δυνατὸν ἐν τῇ γῇ ἔσται τὸ σπέρμα αὐτοῦ.
Δόξα καὶ πλοῦτος ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἡ δικαιοσύνη αὐτοῦ μένει εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος
Ἐξανέτειλεν ἐν σκότει φῶς τοῖς εὐθέσιν.
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν Ὁ Μονογενής.
Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ ὁ ἐκ Παρθένου τεχθεὶς κτλ.

*(Printed Page 270)*

=== LEAF p286 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 25: Nativity of Christ — Praises Concluded & Liturgy Antiphons 1–2 (p. 271)]

271

righteous”; Glory, “When it was time for Your coming upon earth,” Now and ever, “Today Christ” until “we cry aloud without ceasing”; and the Great Doxology begins immediately “Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will Among Men.” { Note: In other words, the last line of the above Theotokion is sung by the Choir as the first line of the Great Doxology following which we sing:} the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ.”
8.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast:

Antiphon One Mode II

I will praise You, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will speak of all Your marvellous works.
In the assembly of the upright and in the congregation: the works of the Lord are great.
They are sought out according to all His purposes.
His work is honorable and glorious: and his righteousness endures for ever.
{Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto the ages of ages. Amen.}
Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, Saviour, save us!

Antiphon Two

Blessed is the man that fears the Lord: he delights greatly in His commandments.
His seed shall be mighty upon the earth: the generation of the upright shall be blessed.
Glory and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness endures for ever.
Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness: he is gracious, full of compassion, and righteousness.
Glory, Now and ever O Only-betotten
O Son of God, born of the Virgin, save us, who sing to You, Alleluia!

*(Printed Page 271)*

=== LEAF p287 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 25: Liturgy Concl. / Dec 26: Synaxis of the Theotokos (p. 272)]

272

Ἀντίφωνον γ΄ Ἦχος δ΄

Εἶπεν ὁ Κύριος τῷ Κυρίῳ μου· Κάθου ἐκ δεξιῶν μου, ἕως ἂν θῶ τοὺς ἐχθρούς σου ὑποπόδιον τῶν ποδῶν σου.
Ῥάβδον δυνάμεως ἐξαποστελεῖ σοι Κύριος ἐκ Σιών.
Μετὰ σοῦ ἡ ἀρχὴ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ τῆς δυνάμεώς σου, ἐν ταῖς λαμπρότησι τῶν ἁγίων σου.
Ἡ γέννησίς σου Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν κτλ.

Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐκ γαστρὸς πρὸ Ἑωσφόρου ἐγέννησά σε, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἡ παρθένος σήμερον τὸν Ὑπερούσιον τίκτει, ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Μεγάλυνον ἡ ψυχή μου . . . Μυστήριον ξένον. Κοινωνικὸν Λύτρωσιν ἀπέστειλε Κύριος τῷ λαῷ αὐτοῦ, Ἀλληλούϊα, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Σημείωσις. Καθ’ ὅλον τὸ δωδεκαήμερον γίνεται ἐν τῇ τραπέζῃ κατάλυσις εἰς πάντα, ἐκτὸς τῆς Παραμονῆς τῶν Φώτων, ἥτις, ἂν ᾖ Σάββατον ἢ Κυριακή, ἐπιτρέπει κατάλυσιν οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου.

Τῇ ΚΣΤ΄.    Ἡ Σύναξις τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου.

9.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα εἰς ς΄. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Δόξα ἐν Ὑψίστοις Θεῷ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Μέγα Προκείμενον Τίς Θεὸς μέγας μετὰ τῶν στίχων αὐτοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Παράδοξον Μυστήριον καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ β΄. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Ἐν Βηθλεὲμ συνέδραμον ποιμένες τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἐκ γ΄ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
10.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, Ἡ γεννησίς σου ἐκ γ΄· εἶτα τὸ ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας (ἄνευ τοῦ Πολυελέου), τὰ δύο Καθίσματα τὸ Δεῦτε ἴδωμεν πιστοὶ καὶ τὸ Τί θαυμάζεις Μαριὰμ καὶ ὁ Ν΄

*(Printed Page 272)*

=== LEAF p288 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 25: Liturgy Concl. / Dec 26: Synaxis of the Theotokos (p. 273)]

273

Antiphon Three Mode Four

The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at My right hand, until I make Your enemies Your footstool.
The Lord shall send You a rod of strength out of Zion.
With You is dominion in the day of Your power: in the beauties of Your saints.
Your birth, O Christ our God, etc.

Entrance Hymn “From the womb before the morning star have I begotten You.” The Apolytikion “Your birth O Christ,” the Kontakion “Today the Virgin gives birth to Him who is above all essence”; instead of the Trisagios Hymn, “As many as have been baptized.” The Apostolos and the Gospel. At “Especially,” “Magnify, O my soul . . . A strange and wonderful mystery.” Communion Hymn “The Lord has sent deliverance to His people. Alleluia,” the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and Dismissal.
Note: During the entire 12 days (following the Nativity) the faithful may consume any food, except on the Eve of Epiphany, on which, if the Feast occurs on a Saturday or Sunday, olive oil and wine are allowed.

The 26th.    Synaxis in Honor of the most-holy Theotokos.

9.    On that Friday evening after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 4 Idiomela of the Feast “Come, let us greatly rejoice in the Lord” in 6 (i.e., repeat the first two). Glory, Now and ever “Glory to God in the highest.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” and the Great Prokimenon “Who is so great a God” with its verses. At the Aposticha: the Idiomela “A marvelous wonder” and the other two. Glory, Now and ever, “The shepherds hastened to Bethlehem.” The Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ” (3 times), and Dismissal.
10.    On Saturday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ” (3 times), then the Psalter of the day (without the Polyeleos). The two Kathismata “Come let us see, O you faithful” and “Why are you filled with wonder, O Mary?” and Psalm 50 (read); both Canons without Verses as yesterday. After the 3rd Ode, the

*(Printed Page 273)*

=== LEAF p289 ===
[Original Greek Text: Dec 26: Matins Concl. & Liturgy / Sunday after Nativity & St. Stephen (p. 274)]

274

ψαλμὸς χῦμα· οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι ἄνευ Στίχων ὡς χθές, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον Ὁ πρὸ Ἑωσφόρου Πατρὸς ἐκλάμψας, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἔσωσε λαὸν καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ καὶ τῶν δύο Κανόνων μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ ἡ Καταβασία Στέργειν μὲν ἡμᾶς, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ἐπεσκέψατο ἡμᾶς ἐκ τρίτου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ δ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Εὐφραίνεσθε δίκαιοι, Δόξα, Σήμερον ἡ ἀόρατος φύσις Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον ὁ Χριστὸς, (μέχρι τοῦ ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀκαταπαύστως βοῶμεν, καὶ ἄρχεται εὐθὺς ἡ) Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου.
11.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς χθές, Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐκ γαστρὸς πρὸ Ἑωσφόρου, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον· ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Σαββάτου μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν Τέκνον Τῖτε, δίωκε δικαιοσύνην (τὸ ὀρθότερον εἶναι Τέκνον Τιμόθεε, Πρὸς Τιμόθεον, 6:11-16) καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον ὡσαύτως Τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ ἠκολούθησαν τῷ Ἰησοῦ ὄχλοι πολλοί. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου . . . Στέργειν μὲν ἡμᾶς, Κοινωνικὸν Λύτρωσιν ἀπέστειλε, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου Χριστὲ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις⁵.

Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Πρωτομάρτυρος καὶ Ἀρχιδιακόνου Στεφάνου.

12.    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῶν Θεοπατόρων τὸν Θεοπάτορα πάντες γ΄ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Στεφάνου γ΄, Δόξα Μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Πρῶτος ἐν Μάρτυσιν ἐδείχθης, Καὶ νῦν Χορεύουσιν Ἄγγελοι, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσὴφ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

5. Ἐν ἄλλαις ἡμέραις (ἐκτὸς δηλονότι τῆς συμπτώσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς ταύτης ἐν Σαββάτῳ ἢ Κυριακῇ), Ἀπόστολος λέγεται Ἀδελφοί, ὁ ἁγιάζων καὶ οἱ ἁγιαζόμενοι καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναχωρησάντων τῶν Μάγων.

*(Printed Page 274)*

=== LEAF p290 ===
[English Facing Translation: Dec 26: Matins Concl. & Liturgy / Sunday after Nativity & St. Stephen (p. 275)]

275

Ypakoi read; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion “He who before the morning star,” the Ikos and the Minologion of the Feast. The Katavasie “He saved the people” then the 9th Ode of both Canons with their Megalynaria and the Katavasia “It would be easier for us.” The Exapostilarion “Our Saviour visited us,” (3 times). At the Praises: the 4 Idiomela “Make glad, O you righteous,” Glory, “Today the invisible nature,” Now and ever, “Today Christ” until “we cry aloud without ceasing: Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will Among Men. { Note: the last line of the above Theotokion is sung by the Choir as the first line of the Great Doxology after which we sing the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ”}.
11.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast as yesterday. Entrance Hymn “From the womb before the morning star have I begotten You.” The Apolytikion “Your Nativity,” and the Kontakion “Today the Virgin gives birth to Him who is above all essence.” Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, “As many as have been baptized.” The Apostolos of the Saturday after Christmas “My son Timothy, flee these things” [Note: The Typikon has “Titus”; this is a typographical error because the citation is 1 Timothy 6:11-16]. The Gospel “At that time, a large crowd followed Jesus” [Matthew 12:15-21]. At “Especially,” “Magnify, O my soul . . . It would be easier for us.” Communion Hymn “The Lord has sent deliverance,” the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and Dismissal.⁵

Sunday After Christmas, and the Holy Protomartyr and Archdeacon Stephen.

12.    In Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Fathers “Come, let us extol David the king,” and 3 of Saint Stephen; Glory, “Let us commemorate,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint “You were the first in martyrdom,” Now and ever, “Today all the angels.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of Saint Stephen, of the Fathers “Proclaim, O Joseph,” and Dismissal.

5. On other days (except those of the occurrence of this Feast on a Saturday or Sunday), the Apostolos read is “Brethren, both He that sanctifies and they who are sanctified” [Hebrew 2:11-18]; and the Gospel “And when the wise men departed” [Matthew 2:13-23].

*(Printed Page 275)*
