=== LEAF p841 ===
[Original Greek Text: Pentecost Vespers Concluded (§ 47), Pentecost Sunday Matins (§ 48), and Divine Liturgy Antiphons (§ 49 Opening) (p. 826)]

826

ἤχου Πεντηκοστὴν ἑορτάζομεν εἰς ε΄ καὶ τὰ ε΄ τοῦ β΄ ἤχου
Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς εἰς ς΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Δεῦτε λαοί, Εἴσοδος,
τὸ Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν, καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Ἀγνοοῦντα
τὰ ἔθνη, Κύριε, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Γλῶσσαί ποτε, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐκ γ΄ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις Ὁ ἐν
εἴδει πυρίνων γλωσσῶν οὐρανόθεν καταπέμψας τὸ πανάγιον
Πνεῦμα ἐπὶ τοὺς ἁγίους αὐτοῦ Μαθητὰς καὶ Ἀποστόλους
Χριστὸς κτλ.

48.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα
τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ γ΄, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ γ΄
Καθίσματα ἐκ β΄, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ
Προκείμενον Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὁδηγήσει με ἐν γῇ
εὐθείᾳ, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Οὔσης ὀψίας μέχρι
τοῦ Ἄν τινων κρατῆτε κεκράτηνται· Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ
οὐ λέγομεν, ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺς τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν
Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν
με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, οἱ Κανόνες
ἀμφότεροι ἄνευ Στίχων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ Κάθισμα ἅπαξ, ἀφ᾽ ς΄
τὸ Κοντάκιον· ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς
Πεντηκοστῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι διπλαῖ· εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδή, τὸ
α΄ Ἐξαποστειλάριον δίς, καὶ τὸ β΄ ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ γ΄
Ἰδιόμελα Παράδοξα σήμερον εἰς δ΄ (Τὸ Πεντηκοστάριον ὑποδεικνύει
ὅτι ἕκαστον Ἰδιόμελον ἐπαναλαμβάνεται) Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Βασιλεῦ
οὐράνιε Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.
49.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα.

Ἀντίφωνον Α΄
Οἱ οὐρανοὶ διηγοῦνται δόξαν Θεοῦ,
ποίησιν δὲ χειρῶν αὐτοῦ ἀναγγέλλει τὸ
στερέωμα.
    | Ταῖς
    | πρεσβείαις
    | τῆς
    | Θεοτόκου...
Ἡμέρα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐρεύγεται ῥῆμα καὶ
νὺξ νυκτὶ ἀναγγέλλει γνῶσιν.
Οὐκ εἰσὶ λαλιαὶ οὐδὲ λόγοι, ὧν
οὐχὶ ἀκούονται αἱ φωναὶ αὐτῶν.
Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν ἐξῆλθεν ὁ
φθόγγος αὐτῶν καὶ εἰς τὰ πέρατα τῆς
οἰκουμένης τὰ ῥήματα αὐτῶν.

*(Printed Page 826)*

=== LEAF p842 ===
[English Facing Translation: Pentecost Vespers Concluded (§ 47), Pentecost Sunday Matins (§ 48), and Divine Liturgy Antiphons (§ 49 Opening) (p. 827)]

827

[repeating the first and second hymns] and the Five of Mode II "We have
seen the [true] Light" in 6, repeating the first hymn. Glory, Now and ever
"Come, O you peoples." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon
"The Lord has reigned as King" and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the
three Idiomela "The nations being ignorant, Lord" Glory, Now and ever,
"Of old the tongues." The Apolytikion "Blessed are You, O Christ our
God" three times and Dismissal: "May Christ our true God, who sent the
All-holy Spirit from heaven as tongues of fire upon His Apostles and
Disciples . . ."
48.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti, then the Trisagion,
the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion
(three times), then the Psalter and the Polyeleos; the three Kathismata, twice
each, the First Antiphon of the Anavathmi of Mode IV and the Prokimenon
"Your good Spirit shall lead me in the right path," then "Let everything
that breathes" and the Gospel "When it was evening on that day" until
"those which you retain are retained" (John 20:19-23). We do not recite
"Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ" but read immediately Psalm
50. Glory, "By the intercessions of the Apostles," Now and ever, "By the
intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "Have mercy on me, O God"
and the Idiomelon "Heavenly King." Both Canons without verses. After
the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma (once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos,
the Minologion, and the Postscript of Pentecost. The Katavasie of both
Canons [double] and then the 9th Ode. The first Exapostilarion (twice) and
the second one (once). At the Praises: the 3 Idiomela "Strange things
today" in 4 by repeating the first hymn {Note: the Pentikostarion indicates
that each Idiomelon is repeated}, Glory, Now and ever, "Heavenly King,"
Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.
49.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

ANTIPHON ONE
The heavens are telling the glory of
God; and the firmament proclaims his handiwork.
Day to day pours forth speech, and night
to night declares knowledge.
There is no speech, nor are there words;
their voice is not heard.
Yet their voice goes out through all the
earth, and their words to the end of the world.
    | Through the
    | intercessions
    | of the
    | Theotokos...

*(Printed Page 827)*

=== LEAF p843 ===
[Original Greek Text: Pentecost Liturgy Continued (§ 49 Antiphons 2–3, Entrance, Readings, Zadostoinyk) (p. 828)]

828

Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,

Ἀντίφωνον Β΄
Ἐπακούσαι σου Κύριος ἐν ἡμέρᾳ
θλίψεως, ὑπερασπίσαι σου τὸ ὄνομα
τοῦ Θεοῦ Ἰακώβ.
    | Σῶσον
    | ἡμᾶς,
    | Παράκλητε
    | ἀγαθέ...
Ἐξαποστείλαι σοι βοήθειαν ἐξ
ἁγίου καὶ ἐκ Σιὼν ἀντιλάβοιτό σου.
Μνησθείη πάσης θυσίας σου, καὶ
τὸ ὁλοκαύτωμά σου πιανάτω.
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ μονογενὴς
Υἱός...

Ἀντίφωνον Γ΄
Κύριε ἐν τῇ δυνάμει σου
εὐφρανθήσεται ὁ Βασιλεύς καὶ ἐπὶ τῷ
σωτηρίῳ σου ἀγαλλιάσεται σφόδρα.
    | Εὐλογητὸς
    | εἶ, Χριστὲ
    | ὁ Θεὸς
    | ἡμῶν...
Τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν τῆς καρδίας αὐτοῦ
ἔδωκας αὐτῷ, καὶ τὴν θέλησιν τῶν χειλέων
αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἐστέρησας αὐτόν.
Ὅτι προέφθασας αὐτὸν ἐν
εὐλογίαις χρηστότητος, ἔθηκας ἐπὶ τὴν
κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ στέφανον ἐκ λίθου τιμίου.
[Ζωὴν ᾐτήσατό σε, καὶ ἔδωκας
αὐτῷ μακρότητα ἡμερῶν εἰς αἰῶνας
αἰῶνος.]*

---
* Ἐνῷ ὁ τελευταῖος αὐτὸς στίχος δὲν ὑποδεικνύται εἰς τὸ Τυπικόν, εὑρίσκεται εἰς τὸ Πεντηκοστάριον, τὸ Ὡρολόγιον, Ἡμερολόγιον τοῦ Πατριαρχείου.

Τὸ Εἰσοδικόν, Ὑψώθητι Κύριε ἐν τῇ δυνάμει σου, ᾄσομεν
καὶ ψαλοῦμεν τὰς δυναστείας σου. Εὐλογητὸς εἶ
Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὅτε καταβάς. Ὅσοι εἰς
Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως, Μὴ τῆς φθορᾶς διαπείρᾳ κυοφορήσασα, Κοινωνικὸν

*(Printed Page 828)*

=== LEAF p844 ===
[English Facing Translation: Pentecost Liturgy Continued (§ 49 Antiphons 2–3, Entrance, Readings, Zadostoinyk) (p. 829)]

829

Glory [to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit,] Now and ever
[and unto ages of ages. Amen.]

ANTIPHON TWO
The Lord answer you in the day of
trouble! The name of the God of Jacob protect you!
May he send you help from the sanctuary,
and give you support from Zion.
May he remember all your offerings,
and regard with favor your burnt sacrifices.
    | Save, Good
    | Paraclete,
    | us... [Who
    | sing to You,
    | Alleluia.]

Glory [to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit,] Now and ever
[and to ages of ages. Amen.] Only begotten Son . . ."

ANTIPHON THREE
In your strength the king rejoices,
O Lord, and in your help how greatly he exults!
You have given him his heart's desire,
and have not withheld the request of his lips.
For you meet him with rich blessings;
you set a crown of fine gold on his head.
{He asked you for life; You gave to him
length of days forever and ever.}*
    | Blessed are
    | You, Christ
    | our God...

---
* {While this last verse is not indicated in the Typikon, it is in the Pentikostarion, the Orologion and in the Imerologia of the Patriarchate.}

The Entrance Hymn "Be exalted, O Lord, in Your power: we will
sing and praise Your mighty deeds. O Good Paraclete, save us who sing
to You, Alleluia." After the Entrance, "Blessed are You, Christ our God"
and the Kontakion "When the Most High came down." [Instead of the
Trisagios Hymn] "As many as have been baptized." The Apostolos and
Gospel. At "Especially," "You who without experience of corruption,"

*(Printed Page 829)*

=== LEAF p845 ===
[Original Greek Text: Pentecost Liturgy Concluded (§ 49) and Great Vespers of Pentecost with Kneeling Prayers (§ 50 Opening) (p. 830)]

830

Τὸ πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὁδηγήσει με ἐν γῇ εὐθείᾳ. 15. Εἰς
τὸ Μετὰ φόβου, Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, Εἴη τὸ
ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ ἡ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ σημειωθεῖσα Ἀπόλυσις 16.

50.    Ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν εἰς ς΄ τὰ γ΄ τῶν Αἴνων Ἰδιόμελα Παράδοξα
σήμερον, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, Εἴσοδος μετὰ θυμιατοῦ,
Φῶς ἱλαρόν 17, τὸ Μ. Προκείμενον μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ ἅπαξ ἀπὸ
τοῦ Βήματος καὶ ἀνὰ μίαν ἀπὸ {ἑκάστου τῶν δύο} Χορῶν, καὶ εὐθὺς
ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι κλίναντες τὰ γόνατα τοῦ Κυρίου
δεηθῶμεν, καὶ τοῦ λαοῦ κλίναντος τὰ γόνατα καὶ ἐν εὐλαβείᾳ
ἀκροωμένου ἀσκεποῦς, ὁ Πατριάρχης λέγει τὰς Εὐχὰς εἰς ἐπήκοον
πάντων. Μετὰ τὴν β΄ Εὐχήν, Εὐλογητὸς εἶ, Κύριε Δέσποτα
Παντοκράτορ, ὁ Διάκονος Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον,
ἀνάστησον κτλ. καὶ ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Σὸν γάρ ἐστιν· ὁ Διάκονος
τὸ Εἴπωμεν πάντες, ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Ὅτι ἐλεήμων καὶ
φιλάνθρωπος, καὶ αὖθις ὁ Διάκονος Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι κλίναντες τὰ
γόνατα, καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ ἕτεραι δύο Εὐχαί· εἰς τὸ τέλος
ὁ Διάκονος Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον, ἀνάστησον κτλ. καὶ
ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Εὐδοκίᾳ καὶ χάριτι τοῦ Μονογενοῦς σου Υἱοῦ·
εἶτα τὸ Καταξίωσον Κύριε· μετὰ τοῦτο ὁ Διάκονος αὖθις Ἔτι
καὶ ἔτι κλίναντες τὰ γόνατα, καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται καὶ αἱ
τελευταῖαι τρεῖς Εὐχαί 18. Εἰς τὸ τέλος ὁ Διάκονος καὶ πάλιν
Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον, ἀνάστησον κτλ. καὶ ἡ Ἐκφώνησις
Σὺ γὰρ εἶ ἡ ἀνάπαυσις τῶν ψυχῶν καὶ τῶν σωμάτων ἡμῶν·
ὁ Διάκονος Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑσπερινήν, ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Ὅτι

---
15. Τὸ ἀρχαῖον Τυπικόν, ὡς καὶ τὰ Πεντηκοστάρια, σημειοῖ διὰ τὴν σήμερον τοῦτο
τὸ Κοινωνικὸν καὶ οὐχὶ Τὸ πνεῦμα σου τὸ ἅγιον μὴ ἀντανέλῃς ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν,
ὅπερ ἔθηκεν ὁ Κωνσταντῖνος, καίπερ ἐν τῇ Ἀποδόσει φαίνεται διορθῶν τὸ λάθος
ὁρίζων Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθόν.
16. Ψαλλομένου τοῦ Κοινωνικοῦ, οἱ Διάκονοι λαμβάνουσι καιρόν, εἰσέρχονται εἰς τὸ Ἅγιον
Βῆμα, καὶ ἐνδυθέντες τὰ ἱερὰ αὐτῶν ἄμφια, ἐξέρχονται μετὰ Δικηροτρικηρων καὶ ἵστανται
περὶ τὸν θρόνον, εἰς δὲ τὴν Ἀπόλυσιν ὁ Πατριάρχης ἐνδύεται ἐπιτραχήλιον καὶ ὠμοφόριον
καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ θρόνου ἱστάμενος ποιεῖ Εὐλογητὸν καὶ ἄρχεται τοῦ Προοιμιακοῦ· οἱ δὲ
Ἀρχιερεῖς λαβόντες τὸ Ἀντίδωρον, εἰσέρχονται εἰς τὸ Ἱερὸν Βῆμα.
17. Ἐπειδὴ ἕπεται Μέγα Προκείμενον, ψάλλεται ὁλόκληρον τὸ Φῶς ἱλαρὸν ἔξω· καὶ
μόνον εἰς τὸ τέλος εἰσέρχεται ὁ Πατριάρχης εἰς τὸ Ἱερὸν καὶ ψάλλει ἐκεῖθεν τὸ
Προκείμενον.
18. Ἐν τῇ τελευταίᾳ ἐκδόσει τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου τῇ κατὰ τὸ 1875 φέρονται τρεῖς αἱ
Εὐχαὶ τῆς τελευταίας Στάσεως· ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ ἀρχαίῳ Τυπικῷ τοῦ ͵αχπε΄ [1685] καὶ ἐν ἀρχαίαις
ἐκδόσεσι τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου φέρονται αἱ τρεῖς αὗται Εὐχαὶ συνηνωμέναι εἰς δύο.

*(Printed Page 830)*

=== LEAF p846 ===
[English Facing Translation: Pentecost Liturgy Concluded (§ 49) and Great Vespers of Pentecost with Kneeling Prayers (§ 50 Opening) (p. 831)]

831

Communion Hymn "Your good Spirit shall lead me in a right path.
[Alleluia]." 15 At the "With the fear of God," we chant "Blessed are You,
Christ our God"; then "Blessed be the name of the Lord" and Dismissal
as indicated at Vespers. 16
50.    In Great Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I
have cried" we chant 6 verses of the three Idiomela Stichira of Matins
"Strange things today" (repeating each one once) Glory, Now and ever,
"Heavenly King." Entrance with the censer, "O Gladsome Light." 17 The
Great Prokimenon with its three verses once from the Vima [Sanctuary] and
once by each of the two Choirs, and immediately the Great Archdeacon:
"Again and again, bending the knees, let us pray to the Lord," and the
people bending the knees and in piety and reverence with heads uncovered
listen, as the Patriarch says the Prayers to the hearing of all. After the second
Prayer, "Blessed are You, Master, Almighty Lord." The Deacon: "Help
us, save us, have mercy on us, raise us up, etc.," and the Exclamation "For
Yours it is to show mercy." The Deacon: "Let us all say," with the
Exclamation "For You are a merciful and man-loving God." And
immediately, the Deacon: "Again and again on bended knees" and the
next two Prayers are read; at the end, the Deacon: "Help us, save us, have
mercy on us, raise us up," etc., and the Exclamation "By the favor and
grace of Your only-begotten Son." Then the "Vouchsafe, O Lord."
Immediately after this, the Deacon: "Again and again on bended knees"
and the last three Prayers are read; 18 at the end, the Deacon again: "Help
us, save us, have mercy on us, raise us up," etc., and the Exclamation "For
You are the repose of our souls and bodies." Then the Deacon: "Let us
complete our evening prayer," the Exclamation "For You are a good and
man-loving God." The Patriarch: "Peace be to all," etc., "May the might

---
15. The ancient Typikon, as well as the Pentikostaria, note for today this Communion Hymn
and not "Take not Your holy spirit from us," which Constantine [Protopsaltis] proposed and yet
corrected in the Leave-taking by prescribing "Your good Spirit."
16. While the Communion Hymn is being sung, the Deacons receive the time to enter the Holy
Sanctuary and vest themselves; then they exit with the Hierarchical Candles and stand by the
throne. At the Dismissal, the Patriarch vests with Epitrachilion and Omophorion and, standing
on the [Patriarchal] throne, says "Blessed . . . ." Then, he begins the Introductory Psalm; the
Hierarchs, having received the Antidoron, enter the Holy Sanctuary.
17. Since it is a Great Prokimenon that follows it, "O Gladsome Light" is sung entirely outside
the Sanctuary; and only at the end does the Patriarch enter into the Sanctuary and from there
chants the Prokimenon.
18. In the last edition of the Pentikostarion in 1875, there are three Prayers of the last Stasis;
but in the ancient Typikon of 1685 and in earlier editions of the Pentikostarion the three Prayers
appear to have been united into two.

*(Printed Page 831)*

=== LEAF p847 ===
[Original Greek Text: Kneeling Vespers Concluded (§ 50), Monday of the Holy Spirit (§§ 51–52), and Apodosis Note (p. 832)]

832

ἀγαθὸς καὶ φιλάνθρωπος, ὁ Πατριάρχης Εἰρήνη πᾶσι κτλ. Εἴη
τὸ κράτος, καὶ ψάλλονται τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Ἀπόστιχα Νῦν εἰς
σημεῖον τοῖς πᾶσιν, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Δεῦτε λαοὶ τὴν
Τρισυπόστατον θεότητα, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐκ γ΄, καὶ ἡ
Ἀπόλυσις παρὰ τοῦ Πατριάρχου Ὁ ἐκ τῶν πατρικῶν κόλπων
κτλ. εἶτα τὸ Δι᾽ εὐχῶν.
51.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος, μετὰ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ
Θεός, λέγεται τὸ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός, Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, Τρισάγιον
κτλ. ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς
καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τῆς Ἀπολύσεως τοῦ Μεσονυκτικοῦ· εἶτα μετὰ τὸ
Εὐλογητός, τοῦ Ὄρθρου ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος ὡς σύνηθες. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ γ΄ καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ β΄ Καθίσματα
τῆς α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίας ἐκ β΄, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα καὶ οἱ Κανόνες
ἀμφότεροι ὡς χθὲς ἄνευ Στίχων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ Κάθισμα Τὸ
Πανάγιον Πνεῦμα ἅπαξ,, ἀφ᾽ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς,
τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Δευτέρας τοῦ Ἁγίου Πνεύματος,
αἱ Καταβασίαι Θείῳ καλυφθεὶς μόναι, εἶτα ἡ θ΄ Ὠδή, τὰ
Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ α΄ δίς, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ
γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Ἐν τοῖς Προφήταις ἀνήγγειλας εἰς δ΄. (Τὸ
Πεντηκοστάριον ὑποδεικνύει ὅτι ἕκαστον τῶν 3 Ἰδιομέλων πρέπει νὰ
ἐπαναλειφθῇ πρὸς τὸ σύνολον τῶν 6) Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Γλῶσσαί ποτε
συνεχύθησαν, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστέ.
52.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς
ἑορτῆς ὡς χθές, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον, Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν
ἐβαπτίσθητε, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως Χαίροις ἄνασσα, Κοινωνικὸν Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἅγιον
μὴ ἀντανέλῃς ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν δεόμεθα, φιλάνθρωπε, τὸ Εἴδομεν τὸ
φῶς, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις Ὁ ἐν εἴδει πυρίνων
γλωσσῶν . . .

    Καθ᾽ ὅλην τὴν ἑβδομάδα ταύτην γίνεται κατάλυσις εἰς πάντα.
    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς
Πεντηκοστῆς καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀπαραλλάκτως
ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν § 47-49, ἐξαιρουμένων ἐν μὲν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ 19 τῶν
Ἀναγνωσμάτων, ἐν δὲ τῷ Ὄρθρῳ τῆς Λιτῆς, τοῦ Πολυελέου μετὰ
τοῦ Καθίσματος τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας, καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου τοῦ

---
19. Εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἱστῶμεν κατὰ τὴν Ἀπόδοσιν Στίχους μόνον η΄

*(Printed Page 832)*

=== LEAF p848 ===
[English Facing Translation: Kneeling Vespers Concluded (§ 50), Monday of the Holy Spirit (§§ 51–52), and Apodosis Note (p. 833)]

833

of Your Kingdom," and then are chanted the three Idiomela Aposticha
"Now as a sign to all," Glory, Now and ever, "Come, all peoples, [let us
worship] the Godhead in three persons." Then the "Now let [Your servant]
depart," the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast "Blessed are You,
Christ our God" three times and the Dismissal by the Patriarch: "May
Christ our true God, [Who emptied Himself, leaving the bosom of the
Father,] etc.," then "Through the prayers."
51.    On Monday of the Holy Spirit, after "Blessed is our God," we say
"Glory to You, O God . . . Heavenly King, the Trisagion, Psalm 50, the
Apolytikion of the Feast then "Have mercy on us, O God" and the rest of the
Dismissal of the Midnight Service. Then, after the "Blessed is our God" of
Matins, the Exapsalmos is recited as usual. At "God is the Lord": the
Apolytikion (three times), and the Psalter, the two Kathismata of the First
and Second Stasis twice each, Psalm 50 (read), and both the Canons as
yesterday without verses. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma "The All-holy
Spirit" (once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos of the Feast, the
Minologion, and the Postscript of the Monday of the Holy Spirit. The
Katavasie "Covered by a divine cloud," then the 9th Ode. The first
Exapostilarion (twice) and the second one (once). At the Praises: the 3
Idiomela "By the Prophets, You did proclaim" [repeating the first] {Note: the
Pentikostarion indicates that each of the 3 Idiomela must be repeated one time for a total of 6}, Glory,
Now and ever, "Of old the tongues were confused," Great Doxology and
the "Blessed are You, Christ our God."
52.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of the Feast
as yesterday, the Apolytikion and the Kontakion. Then [instead of the
Trisagios Hymn] "As many as have been baptized." Epistle and Gospel of
the day. At "Especially," "Rejoice, O Queen," Communion Hymn "Do
not take Your Holy Spirit from us we pray, O Lover of mankind.
[Alleluia.]" "We have seen the [true] light," "Blessed be the name of the
Lord" and Dismissal "[May Christ our true God, who sent the All-holy
Spirit from heaven,] as tongues of fire [upon His Apostles and Disciples]."
    During this entire week of Holy Pentecost, all foods are permitted.
    On Saturday of this week we have the Leave-taking of the Feast of
Pentecost. The Service is sung as prescribed in Paragraphs 47 - 49, with the
exception, in Vespers, 19 of the Readings; in Matins, of the Liti of the
Polyeleos and of the Kathisma of the Third Stasis, and of the Matins Gospel.
In the Liturgy, we read the Apostolos and Gospel of the day. At "Espe-

---
19. At "Lord, I have cried" we insert at the Leave-taking only eight verses.

*(Printed Page 833)*

=== LEAF p849 ===
[Original Greek Text: Apodosis Concluded (§ 52) and Sunday of All Saints (§§ 53–55 Opening) (p. 834)]

834

Ὄρθρου. Ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγεται
τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Χαίροις Ἄνασσα, Κοινωνικὸν
Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθόν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα
Κυρίου, Ἀπόλυσις καὶ Ἀπόδοσις.
    Μετὰ τὴν Ἀπόδοσιν τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἰς τὸ ἑξῆς Καταβασίαι
ψάλλονται Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ Κοντάκιον ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ
Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν.

Τῌ ΚΥΡΙΑΚῌ ΤΩΝ ΑΓΙΩΝ ΠΑΝΤΩΝ

53.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸ Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ
Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄,
καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄, Δόξα, Μαρτύρων θεῖος χορός, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ
βασιλεὺς τῶν οὐρανῶν, Εἴσοδος, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα,
Δεῦτε πιστοὶ σήμερον, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ Ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής
μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.
54.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ
Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς
τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸ Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ
Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα τῆς α΄ καὶ
β΄ Στιχολογίας, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί,
καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος κανών, καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων. Ἀπὸ
γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα, εἶτα τὰ
Κάθισμα τῶν Ἁγίων μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἀφ᾽ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον
καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα
τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ
στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον,
τὰ β΄ τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα
δ΄, καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄. Δόξα, τὸ Ἑωθινὸν Εἰς τὸ Ὄρος τοῖς
Μαθηταῖς, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ
Σήμερον σωτηρία.
55.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄, καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Ἁγίων Ὡς ἔντιμον,
ἐκλεκτόν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ

*(Printed Page 834)*

=== LEAF p850 ===
[English Facing Translation: Apodosis Concluded (§ 52) and Sunday of All Saints (§§ 53–55 Opening) (p. 835)]

835

cially, "Rejoice, O Queen," Communion Hymn "Your good Spirit [shall
lead me in the right path. Alleluia]." Then "We have seen the [true] light,"
"Blessed be the name of the Lord," Dismissal and the Leave-taking.

    After the Leave-taking of the Feast, the following Katavasie are
sung: "I shall open my mouth"; and in the Liturgy, we sing the Kontakion
"Protection of Christians."

THE SUNDAY OF ALL SAINTS

53.    On Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the
Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant 6 Stichira of the Resurrection and
4 of the Saints. Glory, "O divine chorus of Martyrs," Now and ever, "The
King of the Heavens." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon,
and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory,
"Come, O you faithful today," Now and ever, "My Creator and Re-
deemer." The Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that of the Saints, the
Theotokion, and Dismissal.
54.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Saints, and the "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the
Saints and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in
Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata
of the 1st and 2nd Stasis [Stichologia], the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the
Mode, the Anavathmi, and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrec-
tion and that of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion of the
Resurrection with its Ikos (read), then the Kathisma of the Saints and the
Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Pentikostarion,
the Minologion, and the Postscript of the Sunday of All Saints. The
Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning
Gospel; then we chant "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrec-
tion, the 2 of the Saints and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection
Stichira and 4 of the Saints, Glory, the Eothinon "As the disciples were
hastening to the mountain," Now and ever, "Most blessed." Great
Doxology and "Today salvation."
55.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode, and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saints "As someone honorable
and choice." After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that
of the Saints, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "As to
creation's Planter." Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints. At "Especially,"

*(Printed Page 835)*
