=== LEAF p591 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation XIV Concl. (§§ 26 Concl.–27); Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situation I Opening (§§ 1–2 Opening) (p. 576)]

576

καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τῶν Ἁγίων γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄. Δόξα, Εἰς τὸ ὄρος τοῖς Μαθηταῖς, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Τροπάριον Σήμερον σωτηρία.
27.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὡς ἀπαρχὰς τῆς φύσεως. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Ἀγαλλιᾶσθε δίκαιοι, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Ἐὰν δὲ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου μνήμη τύχῃ ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ ἔξω τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, καὶ Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ ἀπὸ τοῦ Σαββάτου τῆς τοῦ Παραλύτου ἑβδομάδος μέχρι τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων, ἔξω δὲ τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου μέχρι τῆς Πέμπτης τῆς πρώτης μετὰ τὴν Κυριακὴν τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων ἑβδομάδος. (Ὅρα τὸν Ἑορτοδρόμιον Πίνακα).

Τῇ ΚΕ΄. Ἡ Γ΄ Εὕρεσις τῆς τιμίας κεφαλῆς τοῦ Προδρόμου.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.
1.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Ἀποδόσει τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ Στιχηρὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Προδρόμου, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, τὰ ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τοῦ Προδρόμου, κατὰ τὴν

*(Printed Page 576)*

=== LEAF p592 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation XIV Concl. (§§ 26 Concl.–27); Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situation I Opening (§§ 1–2 Opening) (p. 577)]

577

Minologion of the Saints, and the Postscript of the Pentikostarion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then “More honorable.” The Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of All-Saints, of the Saints and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 2 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 Prosomia of All-Saints, and 3 of the Saints. Glory, “As the disciples were hastening on the mountain,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

27.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes: 4 of the Mode and 4 of the 6th Ode of the Pentikostarion. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of All-Saints, that of Saint Constantine [and Helen], that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “As the first fruits of nature,” Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Rejoice, O righteous ones, in the Lord,” “We have seen the [true] Light,” and Dismissal.
    If the Feast of the Saints [May 21] occurs on a day outside the period of the Pentikostarion, the Service is chanted as prescribed in the Mineon. Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” Kontakion “Protection of all Christians” and Communion Hymn “To all the earth.”
    Note that the Feast of Saint Constantine [and Helen] can occur in the period of the Pentikostarion from the Saturday of the Week of the Paralytic until the Sunday of All-Saints; outside of the Pentikostarion period, on the other hand, until the Thursday after the Sunday of All-Saints. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

The 25th - The Third Finding of the Sacred Head of the Forerunner, [John the Baptist.]

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Feast occurs on the Leave-taking of Mid-Pentecost, at Vespers we sing 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Forerunner, Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever of the Feast, the Aposticha of the Feast, Glory that of the Forerunner, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Forerunner, and again that of the Feast and the Dismissal.
2.    At Matins, the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Amomos, the Kathismata of the Forerunner and of the Feast, the Matins Gospel of the Forerunner according to the order of the Mineon. The Canons

*(Printed Page 577)*

=== LEAF p593 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situation I Concl. (§ 2 Concl.), Situations II–V (§§ 3–5, § 6 Opening) (p. 578)]

578

διάταξιν τοῦ Μηναίου. Οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Προσόμοια τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Προδρόμου, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ Προδρόμου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἀλλότριον τῶν μητέρων, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Β΄.

3.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου ἐν § 7· ἀλλ᾿ εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Δοξαστικὸν Κύριε παράγων ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ, καὶ εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Τίς λαλήσει.

Γ΄.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Πάσχα, τὴν διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Θεολόγου § 10-12.

Δ΄.

5.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς Ἀναλήψεως, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Προδρόμου μετατίθεται καὶ ψάλλεται τῇ ἐπιούσῃ ἡμέρᾳ (τῇ Παρασκευῇ) μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὡς διατάττεται ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.

Ε΄.

6.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν ἁγίων Πατέρων, τὴν διάταξιν ὅρα

*(Printed Page 578)*

=== LEAF p594 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situation I Concl. (§ 2 Concl.), Situations II–V (§§ 3–5, § 6 Opening) (p. 579)]

579

of the Feast and of the Forerunner, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forerunner and the Minologion. The Katavasie of the Feast and the 9th Ode of the Feast and of the Forerunner. The Exapostilarion of the Feast, that of the Forerunner and again that of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Forerunner, Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever of the Feast; Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast; and the Liturgy, in which we sing the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Easter. After the Entrance, we chant the Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Forerunner, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion of the Feast; Apostolos and Gospel of the Forerunner. At “Especially,” “Virginity is alien to motherhood,” Communion Hymn of the Feast, the Apolytikion “Christ is risen,” and Dismissal.

SITUATION TWO

3.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on the Sunday of the Blind Man, the Service is chanted according to the order of service for Saint Constantine in Paragraph 7; but in Vespers, Glory, “Lord, passing by on the way,” and at the Praises “Who can tell of Your mighty acts.”

SITUATION THREE

4.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on the Wednesday of the Leave-taking of Pascha, see the Feast of John the Theologian [May 8], Paragraphs 10 - 12 for the order of service.

SITUATION FOUR

5.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on the Thursday of Ascension, the Service of the Forerunner is moved and chanted on the following day {Friday} together with the Post-feast hymns of the Feast, as prescribed in the Mineon.

SITUATION FIVE

6.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, see

*(Printed Page 579)*

=== LEAF p595 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situation V Concl. (§ 6 Concl.), Situations VI–VII (§§ 7–9) (p. 580)]

580

ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου § 11-13.

ΣΤ΄.

7.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία προψάλλεται τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς Ἀναλήψεως. (Τὴν διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου § 14-16).

Ζ΄.

8.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Προδρόμου μετατίθεται καὶ ψάλλεται τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος ὡς ἑξῆς. Τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς Γονυκλισίας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλονται τῆς ἑορτῆς Παράδοξα σήμερον γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Προδρόμου. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ τάξις τῆς Γονυκλισίας, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα καὶ τὸ Δοξαστικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Προδρόμου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

9.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ πρωΐ, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἐκεῖ ἐξανατελῶ κέρας τῷ Δαβίδ, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τοῦ Προδρόμου, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἡ τῶν θείων ἐννοιῶν (ζήτει εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ Μηναίου). Οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Τὸ πανάγιον πνεῦμα, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς ἑορτῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι Θείῳ καλυφθείς, καὶ ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου Προσόμοια γ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Προδρόμου, Εὐαγγέλιον καὶ Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς.

*(Printed Page 580)*

=== LEAF p596 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situation V Concl. (§ 6 Concl.), Situations VI–VII (§§ 7–9) (p. 581)]

581

the Feast of Saint Constantine, Paragraphs 11-13 for the order of the service.

SITUATION SIX

7.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on the Saturday of the Souls, the Service is chanted in advance on the Friday of the Leave-taking of the Ascension. (See the Feast of Saint Constantine, Paragraphs 14 - 16 for the order of service.)

SITUATION SEVEN

8.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on the Sunday of Pentecost, the Service of the Forerunner is moved to and celebrated on the Monday of the Holy Spirit as follows: On Sunday at the Vespers of the Kneeling Service, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 3 Idiomela of the Feast, “Today strange things,” and 3 Prosomia of the Forerunner; Glory, Now and ever, “Heavenly King,” and the rest of the Service of the Kneeling. The Aposticha and Glory, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikia: of the Feast, of the Forerunner and again of the Feast, and Dismissal.
9.    On Monday morning at “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers and the Psalter. The Kathismata: of the Forerunner and of the Feast; the Anavathmi, the 1st Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “There I will raise the pride of David.” Then “Let everything that breathes,” and the Matins Gospel of the Forerunner, Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Forerunner,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy on me” and “Of the divine thoughts” (see the Aposticha of the Mineon). The Canons of the Feast and of the Forerunner. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Feast “Now the All-holy Spirit”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, the Minologion of the Forerunner, and the Postscript of the Monday of the Holy Spirit. The Katavasie “Covered by a divine cloud,” and the 9th Ode of the Feast. The Exapostilaria: of the Feast, of the Forerunner and the other one of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Idiomela of the Feast and 3 Prosomia of the Forerunner, Glory, Now and ever of the Feast. Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast. In the Liturgy, Apostolos of the Forerunner, Gospel and Communion Hymn of the Feast.

*(Printed Page 581)*

=== LEAF p597 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situations VIII–IX (§§ 10–11), Situation X Opening (§§ 12–13 Opening) (p. 582)]

582

Η΄.

10.    Εἰ τύχοι μεταξὺ τῶν μεθεόρτων ἡμερῶν τῶν προλαβουσῶν δύο ἑορτῶν, Ἀναλήψεως καὶ Πεντηκοστῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς τυχούσης ἑορτῆς.

Θ΄.

11.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων, τὴν διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου § 25-27.

Ι΄.

12.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ ἔξω τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα ς΄, Καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὢ θαύματος καινοῦ (ὅρα Καὶ νῦν Ἀποστίχων τοῦ Σαββάτου εἰς ἦχον β΄), τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

13.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τοῦ Προδρόμου μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος κανών, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Προδρόμου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ

*(Printed Page 582)*

=== LEAF p598 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situations VIII–IX (§§ 10–11), Situation X Opening (§§ 12–13 Opening) (p. 583)]

583

SITUATION EIGHT

10.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on the days of the Post-feast of the Ascension or Pentecost, the Service is celebrated as prescribed in the Mineon together with the Post-feast hymns of the occurring feast.

SITUATION NINE

11.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on the Sunday of All-Saints, see the Feast of Saint Constantine, Paragraphs 25-27 for the order of service.

SITUATION TEN

12.    If the Feast [May 25] occurs on a Sunday outside the period of the Pentikostarion, in Vespers on Saturday evening, after the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Forerunner. Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever, “O wondrous event” {see Now and ever of the Saturday Aposticha of Mode II}. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
13.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Forerunner and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Forerunner with its Theotokion. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Forerunner. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forerunner, then the Kathisma of the Forerunner and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Saint of the day. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Forerunner, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology

*(Printed Page 583)*

=== LEAF p599 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situation X Concl. (§§ 13 Concl.–14); Month of June: Nativity of St. John the Baptist (June 24); Opening §§ 1–2 Opening (p. 584)]

584

Σήμερον σωτηρία.
14.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Προδρόμου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προδρόμου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ γ΄ Εὕρεσις τῆς τιμίας Κεφαλῆς τοῦ Προδρόμου δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐντὸς τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, ἀπὸ τῆς Τετάρτης Ἀποδόσεως τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς μέχρι τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων, ἐπέκεινα δὲ μέχρι τῆς Δευτέρας τῆς β΄ ἑβδομάδος μετὰ τὴν Πεντηκοστήν. (Ὅρα τὸν Ἑορτοδρόμιον Πίνακα).

ΜΗΝ ΙΟΥΝΙΟΣ

Τῇ ΚΔ΄. Τὸ Γενέσιον τοῦ τιμίου ἐνδόξου Προφήτου Προδρόμου καὶ Βαπτιστοῦ Ἰωάννου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Λύει τοῦ Ζαχαρίου τὴν σιωπὴν εἰς η΄, Δόξα, Σήμερον τοῦ φωτὸς ὁ λύχνος, Καὶ νῦν, Ἡ Ἐλισάβετ συνέλαβε, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα, Ἠσαΐου νῦν τοῦ προφήτου, Καὶ νῦν, Βλέπε τὴν Ἐλισάβετ, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Προφῆτα καὶ Πρόδρομε, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος ἀπόκρυφον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ ἅπαξ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Καὶ σὺ παιδίον προφήτης Ὑψίστου κληθήσῃ, Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ σοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς θεοτόκου, Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ὁ ἐκ κοιλίας μητρὸς ἁγιασθείς. Οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ, πρέσβευε ὑπὲρ

*(Printed Page 584)*

=== LEAF p600 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: Finding of the Head of the Forerunner (May 25); Situation X Concl. (§§ 13 Concl.–14); Month of June: Nativity of St. John the Baptist (June 24); Opening §§ 1–2 Opening (p. 585)]

585

and “Today salvation.”
14.    In the Liturgy, we sing the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Forerunner. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner, of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians”; Apostolos of the Forerunner and Gospel of the Sunday, Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.
    Note that the 3rd Finding of the Sacred Head of the Forerunner may occur in the period of the Pentikostarion, from the Wednesday of the Leave-taking of Mid-Pentecost until the Sunday of All-Saints, and occasionally until the Monday of the second week after Pentecost. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

MONTH OF JUNE

The 24th The Nativity of the Honorable and Glorious Prophet and Forerunner John the Baptist.

1.    In Vespers following the Introductory Psalm and the First Stasis of the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the Idiomela “He unties the silence of Zachariah” in 8, Glory, “Today the lamp of the light,” Now and ever, “Elizabeth conceived.” “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Idiomela, Glory, “Of Isaiah the prophet now,” Now and ever, “Look at Elizabeth.” The Apolytikion “O Prophet and Forerunner” and the Theotokion “The mystery hidden before all time” and Dismissal.
2.    At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion twice and the Theotokion once; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon “And you, child, will be called prophet of the Most High.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Gospel, Psalm 50 read, Glory, “Through the intercessions of Your Forerunner,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy on me” and the Idiomelon “He who was sanctified from the womb of the mother,”

*(Printed Page 585)*
