=== LEAF p291 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 27: Sunday after the Nativity / St. Stephen the Protomartyr & Apodosis of the Nativity (p. 276)]

276

13.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου Χριστὲ ὁ θεὸς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Μνήστορος Χριστοῦ θεράπων μακάριε μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Πατρὸς ὡς ἀληθῶς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Χορὸς τῶν Προφητῶν, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον Εὐφροσύνης σήμερον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἔσωσε λαὸν καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ ἁγίου Στεφάνου, τὸ τοῦ Μνήστορος Σὺν Ἰακώβῳ μέλψωμεν καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα Αἷμα καὶ πῦρ, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

14.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Μνήστορος δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσὴφ, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναχωρησάντων τῶν Μάγων. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
       Σημ. Τῆς μνήμης τοῦ ἁγίου Στεφάνου ἐν ἄλλαις ἡμέραις συμπιπτούσης (ἐκτὸς δηλονότι τῇ Κυριακῇ μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν), ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ· ἐν Σαββάτῳ δὲ συμπιπτούσης, Ἀπόστολος λέγεται τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Σαββάτου μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῶν Χριστουγέννων.

15.    Τῆς ἑορτῆς ἡ Ἀπόδοσις κατὰ τὴν Α΄ ταύτην περίπτωσιν γίνεται τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς προσεχοῦς ἑβδομάδος, καθ’ ἣν ἡμέραν ψάλλονται ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐξαιρουμένων ἐν μὲν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῶν Ἀναγνωσμάτων, ἐν δὲ τῷ Ὄρθρῳ τῆς Λιτῆς, τοῦ

*(Printed Page 276)*

=== LEAF p292 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 27: Sunday after the Nativity / St. Stephen the Protomartyr & Apodosis of the Nativity (p. 277)]

277

13.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ our God,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Feast for each of the Theotokia; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Betrothed [Saint Joseph] “Blessed servant of Christ” with the Verse “Holy one of God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma “As a true Father,” that of the Saint, and “The chorus of Prophets”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion “Of joy today,” and Ikos, and the Minologion of the Saint and the Postscript of the Sunday after the Nativity. The Katavasie “He saved the people,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of Saint Stephen, of the Betrothed “With James let us sing” and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint; Glory, “The blood and fire,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
14.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Betrothed. After the Entrance, “O come let us worship . . . who is risen from the dead.” The Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Fathers “Proclaim, O Joseph,” that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “The Virgin today.” The Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel “And after Magi departed.” At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
       Note: If the commemoration of Saint Stephen occurs on other days (except, that is, on the Sunday after the Nativity), his Service together with the Post-feast is chanted as prescribed in the Mineon; if the Feast occurs on a Saturday, the Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Saturday after the Nativity are read.

The Leave-taking of Christmas.

15.    The Leave-taking of the Feast [December 31] in this First Situation is done on the Thursday of the following week on which day is sung the entire office of the Feast, omitting the Readings in Vespers, the Liti in Matins, the Polyeleos and the Gospel in Matins; in the Liturgy, the Apostolos

*(Printed Page 277)*

=== LEAF p293 ===
[Original Greek Text: Apodosis Concluded; Situation Two: Nativity on Saturday, December 26 on Sunday (p. 278)]

278

Πολυελέου καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου τοῦ Ὄρθρου, ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ δὲ Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τὰ τῆς ἡμέρας.

Β΄.

16.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Σαββάτου, τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωΐ μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Ὄρθρου ἐνδιάτακτον Ἀκολουθίαν (ὅρ. Περίπτωσιν Α΄, § 1-5), ψάλλονται· αἱ Μ. Ὧραι, ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α § 1-6.
17.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 7, 8.

Ἡ Σύναξις τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου καὶ ἡ Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν.

18.    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα γ΄ καὶ τῶν Θεοπατόρων γ΄. Δόξα Μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν, Καὶ νῦν Δόξα ἐν Ὑψίστοις θεῷ. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Μ. Προκείμενον Τίς θεὸς μέγας μετὰ τῶν στίχων αὐτοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά. Δόξα Ἱερέων μνήμη, Καὶ νῦν Ἐν Βηθλεὲμ συνέδραμον ποιμένες, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, Δόξα Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσὴφ, Καὶ νῦν Ἡ γέννησίς σου Χριστὲ ὁ θεὸς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

19.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Μνήστορος Χριστοῦ θεράπων μακάριε μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ θεοῦ. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Πατρὸς ὡς ἀληθῶς, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Χορὸς τῶν Προφητῶν. Ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον Εὐφροσύνης σήμερον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἔσωσε λαὸν καὶ

*(Printed Page 278)*

=== LEAF p294 ===
[English Facing Translation: Apodosis Concluded; Situation Two: Nativity on Saturday, December 26 on Sunday (p. 279)]

279

and Gospel of the day are read.

SITUATION TWO

16.    If the Feast of the Nativity of Christ occurs on a Saturday, on Friday morning after the prescribed Matins Service (see Situation One, Paragraphs 1-5) the following are sung: the Great Hours, Great Vespers and the Liturgy of Basil the Great, as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 1 - 6.
17.    On Saturday, the Matins of the Feast with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are sung, as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 7, 8.

The Synaxis of the Theotokos and the Sunday after Christ's Birth.

18.    That Saturday evening after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Idiomela of the Feast “Come, let us rejoice in the Lord” and 3 of the Fathers. Glory, “Let us commemorate,” Now and ever, “Glory to God in the highest.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Great Prokimenon “Who is so great a God” with its verses. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira. Glory, “The commemoration of priests,” Now and ever, “The shepherds hastened to Bethlehem.” The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, Glory “Proclaim, O Joseph,” Now and ever, “Your birth, O Christ,” and Dismissal.
19.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Feast in place of each of the Theotokia, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Betrothed {Saint Joseph} “Blessed servant of Christ” with the Verse “Holy one of God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos, then the Kathisma “As a true Father,” Glory, Now and ever, “The chorus of Prophets.” After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion “Of joy today,” the Ikos, and the Minologion and the Postscript of the Sunday after Christmas. The Katavasie “He

*(Printed Page 279)*

=== LEAF p295 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situation Two Concluded; Situation Three: Nativity on Sunday (p. 280)]

280

ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ καὶ τῶν δύο κανόνων τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ ἡ Καταβασία Στέργειν μὲν ἡμᾶς. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Θεοπατόρων Σὺν Ἰακώβῳ μέλψωμεν καὶ μεθέορτον Καθάρθητε, προσέλθετε. (Σημ. Αὐτὸ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον δὲν εὑρίσκεται εἰς τὸ Μηναῖον, τὸ ὁποῖον ἐπανηλλειμένως συνιστᾷ εἰς αὐτὴν τὴν θέσιν τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἐπεσκέψατο ἡμᾶς.) Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Εὐφραίνεσθε δίκαιοι δ΄. Δόξα Αἷμα καὶ πῦρ, Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον ἡ ἀόρατος φύσις Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
20.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἰς τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον ὁ ἐκ Παρθένου τεχθείς. Εἰς τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου Χριστέ, Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσήφ, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου, τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Μεγαλυνον ψυχή μου . . . Στέργειν μὲν ἡμᾶς, Κοινωνικὸν Λύτρωσιν ἀπέστειλε, τὸ Ἡ γέννησίς σου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
       Σημ. Περὶ τῆς μνήμης τοῦ ἁγίου Στεφάνου ἐν τῇ Β΄ ταύτῃ περιπτώσει, ὅρα ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 14 σημ.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

21.    Τῆς ἑορτῆς ἡ Ἀπόδοσις [Δεκεμβρίου 31] κατὰ τὴν Β΄ ταύτην περίπτωσιν γίνεται τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς προσεχοῦς ἑβδομάδος, ἐν ᾗ, ὡς ἔφημεν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 15, ψάλλονται ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῶν ἐξαιρέσεων, αἵτινες ἐσημειώθησαν ἐκεῖ.

Γ΄.

22.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωΐ μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Ὄρθρου ἐνδιάτακτον Ἀκολουθίαν, (ὅρα περίπτ. Α΄ § 1-5) ψάλλονται αἱ Μ. Ὧραι μόναι· μετὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς Θ΄ Ὥρας γίνεται ἡ συνήθης Ἀπόλυσις.
       Σημ. Κατὰ τὴν Γ΄ ταύτην περίπτωσιν εἰς τὰς Ὥρας Τροπάριον λέγεται τὸ Ἑτοιμάζου Βηθλεὲμ, διότι Ἀπεγράφετό ποτε

*(Printed Page 280)*

=== LEAF p296 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situation Two Concluded; Situation Three: Nativity on Sunday (p. 281)]

281

saved the people,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing the 9th Ode of both Canons with their Megalynaria and the Katavasia “It would be easier for us.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers “With James let us sing,” and of the Post-feast “Be clean, approach.” [Note: This Exapostilarion is not found in the Mineon. Yet the Mineon repeatedly indicates in this place the Exapostilarion of the Feast “Our Savior has visited us from on high.”] At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Feast “Make glad, O you righteous”; Glory, “The blood and fire,” Now and ever, “Today the invisible nature,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
20.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, at the 2nd Antiphon “...born of a Virgin.” Entrance Hymn “Come let us worship . . . who is risen from the dead.” Apolytikia: The Resurrection Apolytikion, “Your birth, O Christ,” “Proclaim, O Joseph,” that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “The Virgin today.” Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, “As many as have been baptized.” The Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday after The Birth of Christ [Christmas]. At “Especially,” “Magnify, O my soul, . . . It would be easier for us,” Communion Hymn “The Lord has sent deliverance,” the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and Dismissal.
       Note: Concerning the Feast of Saint Stephen in this Second Situation, see the Note in Situation One, Paragraph 14.

The Leave-taking.

21.    The Leave-taking of the Feast [December 31] in this Second Situation takes place the Friday of the following week, on which day the entire office is sung, with the exceptions noted in Situation One, Paragraph 15.

SITUATION THREE

22.    If the Feast of the Nativity of Christ occurs on a Sunday, on Friday morning, after the prescribed Matins Service (see Situation One, Paragraphs 1-5), the Great Hours alone are sung; after the Prayer of the 9th Hour, the usual Dismissal takes place.
       Note: In this Third Situation in the Hours, we use the Hymn “Prepare, Bethlehem,” since “Mary was registered once in a census”

*(Printed Page 281)*

=== LEAF p297 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situation Three Continued: Paramony & Festal Services (p. 282)]

282

λέγεται μόνον ὅταν αἱ Ὧραι ψάλλωνται ἐν τῇ ἀμέσῳ Παραμονῇ τῆς ἑορτῆς.
23.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, ψάλλεται Ἑσπερινὸς κατὰ τὴν τάξιν τοῦ Μηναίου. Μετὰ τὸ Νῦν Ἀπολύεις ψάλλεται ὁ προεόρτιος Κανὼν Κύματι θαλάσσης, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπεγράφετό ποτε καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
24.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ πρωΐ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, οἱ Κανόνες χῦμα, εἶτα ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς Η΄ Ὠδῆς καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Προεόρτιον Ὁ φῶς οἰκῶν ἀπρόσιτον, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὸ ἕτερον Προεόρτιον, οἱ Αἶνοι Ὦ τῶν ὑπὲρ νοῦν, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Ὑπόδεξαι Βηθλεέμ, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, Ἀντίφωνα τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ, εἰς τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἐν ἁγίοις θαυμαστὸς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπεγράφετό ποτε, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Σαββάτου πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
25.    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς ὡς ἑξῆς· Μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα τῷ Κυρίῳ εἰς ς΄, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Αὐγούστου μοναρχήσαντος, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, καὶ εὐθὺς τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα μετὰ τῶν Τροπαρίων ἀπαραλλάκτως ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 6. Μετὰ τὸ τελευταῖον Ἀνάγνωσμα εὐθὺς (ἄνευ τῆς Συναπτῆς) ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἶτα ἡ Μ. Συναπτὴ Εἴπωμεν πάντες, τὸ Καταξίωσον, Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑσπερινὴν, καὶ ψάλλονται τὰ γ΄ Ἀπόστιχα Ἰδιόμελα Μέγα καὶ παράδοξον θαῦμα, Δόξα Εὐφράνθητι Ἱερουσαλὴμ, Καὶ νῦν Σπηλαίῳ παρῴκησας, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου ἐκ γ΄ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις ἡ ἐν § 6 τῆς Α΄ περιπτώσεως.
26.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ, ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 7, 8, μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου.

Ἡ Σύναξις τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου καὶ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν.

Σημ. Κατὰ ταύτην τὴν ἡμέραν τῆς Δευτέρας συμπιάλλεται

*(Printed Page 282)*

=== LEAF p298 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situation Three Continued: Paramony & Festal Services (p. 283)]

283

is said only when the Hours are sung on the immediate Eve of the Feast.
23.    On Friday evening, the Vespers is sung according to the order in the Mineon. After “Lord, now let,” the Canon of the Pre-feast “Waves of the sea” is sung, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Mary was registered once in a census,” and Dismissal.
24.    On Saturday morning at Matins, the Canons are read, the Irmos of the 8th Ode is sung, and then “More honorable” with its verses. Exapostilaria: of the Pre-feast “He who dwells in the light,” of the Saint, and the other one of the Pre-feast, The Praises: “What mysteries beyond the mind,” Glory, Now and ever, “O Bethlehem, receive,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion. In the Liturgy, Antiphons “It is good to confess to the Lord.” At the Entrance “Come let us worship . . . who are wonderful in your saints.” The Apolytikion “Mary was registered once in a census,” of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Today the Virgin.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Saturday before Christmas. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Blessed are those whom you have chosen,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
25.    On that Saturday evening, the Great Vespers of the Feast is sung as follows: After the Introductory Psalm at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 4 Idiomela “Come, let us greatly rejoice in the Lord” in 6 (i.e., repeat the first two). Glory, Now and ever “When Augustus reigned alone on earth.” Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome Light,” and immediately the Readings with the hymns as ordered in Situation One, Paragraph 6. After the last Reading immediately (without the Petition), the Apostolos and Gospel are read. Then the Petitions “Let us all say,” “Vouchsafe,” “Let us complete our evening” and the 3 Idiomela Aposticha: “A great and marvelous wonder,” Glory, “Make glad, O Jerusalem,” Now and ever, “You have come to dwell in a cave.” Then “Lord, now let,” the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ” (3 times), and Dismissal as in Situation One, Paragraph 6.
26.    On Sunday, the Matins of the Feast is sung as stipulated in Situation One, Paragraphs 7, 8, with the Liturgy of Basil the Great.

The Synaxis of the Theotokos and the Service of the Sunday after the Birth of Christ.

       Note: On this day, Monday, is also sung the Service of the Sunday after the Birth of Christ, because the one Sunday between these two great

*(Printed Page 283)*

=== LEAF p299 ===
[Original Greek Text: Synaxis of the Theotokos & Sunday after Nativity on Monday, December 26 (p. 284)]

284

καὶ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν, διότι ἡ μεταξὺ τῶν δύο μεγάλων ἑορτῶν μία Κυριακὴ συμπίπτει τῇ α΄ τοῦ Ἰανουαρίου, καθ’ ἣν ἑορτάζονται ἡ Περιτομὴ τοῦ Κυρίου καὶ ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Μεγάλου Βασιλείου, ψάλλεται δὲ ἡ Ἀκολουθία ὡς ἑξῆς·
27.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ψάλλομεν Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα γ΄ καὶ τῶν Θεοπατόρων γ΄. Δόξα Μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν, Καὶ νῦν Δόξα ἐν ὑψίστοις θεῷ (ζήτει τῇ ΚΣΤ΄). Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Μ. Προκείμενον Τίς θεὸς μέγας μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς Παράδοξον μυστήριον καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ δύο (ζήτει τῇ ΚΣΤ΄). Δόξα Ἱερέων μνήμη (Κυρ. μετὰ τὴν Χ. Γέννησιν), Καὶ νῦν Ἐν Βηθλεὲμ συνέδραμον ποιμένες (ἐν τῇ ΚΣΤ΄), Ἀπολυτίκια Ἡ Γέννησίς σου, τῶν Θεοπατόρων Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσήφ, αὖθις Ἡ Γέννησίς σου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
28.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ Γέννησίς σου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον (ἄνευ τοῦ Πολυελέου), τὰ δύο Καθίσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς Δεῦτε ἴδωμεν πιστοὶ καὶ τὸ Τί θαυμάζεις Μαριάμ; καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς Χριστὸς γεννᾶται μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Μνήστορος Χριστοῦ θεράπων μακάριε μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὰ Καθίσματα Πατρὸς ὡς ἀληθῶς, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Χορὸς τῶν Προφητῶν, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ Γέννησιν, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῶν Θεοπατόρων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἔσωσε λαὸν, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἐκ τοῦ α΄ Κανόνος μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ ἡ τοῦ Μνήστορος μετὰ στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ ἡ καταβασία Στέργειν μὲν ἡμᾶς μετὰ τοῦ Μεγαλυναρίου. Ἐξαποστειλάρια Σὺν Ἰακώβῳ μέλψωμεν καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἐπεσκέψατο ἡμᾶς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ δ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς Εὐφραίνεσθε δίκαιοι. Δόξα Αἷμα καὶ πῦρ. Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον ἡ ἀόρατος φύσις, Δοξολογία μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἡ Γέννησίς σου.
29.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς χθές, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐκ γαστρὸς πρὸ Ἑωσφόρου, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια Ἡ Γέννησίς σου, τὸ Εὐαγγελίζου Ἰωσὴφ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον τὸν Ὑπερούσιον τίκτει· ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστόν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν

*(Printed Page 284)*

=== LEAF p300 ===
[English Facing Translation: Synaxis of the Theotokos & Sunday after Nativity on Monday, December 26 (p. 285)]

285

Feasts is January 1, on which are celebrated the Circumcision of the Lord and the commemoration of Saint Basil; the Service is chanted as follows:

27.    That Sunday evening after the Introductory Psalm at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 3 Idiomela of the Feast “Come, let us greatly rejoice in the Lord,” and 3 of the Fathers {“Come, let us extol David the king,”} Glory, “Let us commemorate,” Now and ever, “Glory to God in the highest,” (see the 26th of this month). Entrance: “O Gladsome Light” and the Great Prokimenon “Who is so great a God” with its verses. At the Aposticha: the Idiomela of the Feast “A marvelous wonder” and the other two (see the 26th of December). Glory, “Your Nativity has become the Priests' memorial” (Sunday after Christmas), Now and ever, “The shepherds hastened to Bethlehem,” (see the 26th of December). The Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” that of the Fathers “Proclaim, O Joseph,” again “Your birth, O Christ,” and Dismissal.
28.    On Monday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion as in Vespers, then the Psalter (without the Polyeleos). The two Kathismata of the Feast “Come, O you faithful” and “Why are you filled with wonder, O Mary?” and Psalm 50 (read). The Canon of the Feast “Christ is born” with the Verse “Glory to You, our God” and the Canon of the Betrothed “Blessed servant of Christ” with the Verse “Holy one of God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Kathismata “As a true Father,” Glory, Now and ever, “The chorus of Prophets”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Sunday after Christmas and the Minologion of the day and the Postscript of the Fathers. The Katavasie “He saved the people,” then the 9th Ode of the Feast from the first Canon with its Megalynaria and that of the Betrothed with the Verse “Holy One of God,” and the Katavasia “It would be easier for us,” with its Megalynarion. Exapostilaria: “With James let us sing” and of the Feast “Our Saviour visited us from on high.” At the Praises: the 4 Idiomela of the Feast “Make glad, O you righteous”; Glory, “The blood and fire,” Now and ever, “Today the invisible nature,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion “Your birth, O Christ.”
29.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast as yesterday. Entrance Hymn “From the womb before the morning star.” The Apolytikia: “Your birth, O Christ,” the “Proclaim, O Joseph,” and the Kontakion “Today the Virgin gives birth to Him who is above all essence.” Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, we sing “As many as have been baptized.” The Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday after Christmas. At “Especially,” “It would be easier for us.” Communion Hymn “The Lord has sent deliverance,” the

*(Printed Page 285)*
