=== LEAF p351 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday after Epiphany with the Triodion (§ 44 concl. – § 47 incipit) (p. 336)]

336

εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου δ΄. Μετὰ
τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ
Ὁσίου καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον,
ὁ Ἀπόστολος τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ
Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
45.    Εἰ τύχοι ἄρχεσθαι τὸ Τριῴδιον τῇ ΙΒ΄ ἢ τῇ ΙΓ΄ τοῦ μηνός,
ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα καὶ ἡ τοῦ Τριῳδίου
ψάλλονται ὡς ἐφεξῆς· Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν
καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα γ΄ Ὕμνον νῦν
μεθέορτον (ὅρα 12 Ἰανουαρίου), Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ
νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ
τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα
τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον Ὁρῶσά σε ἡ φύσις ἅπασα,
(ὅρα Δοξαστικὸν τῶν Ἀποστίχων Ἑσπερινοῦ τῆς 12ης Ἰανουαρίου),
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
46.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
Κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἐν
Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ
ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων ἀντὶ
Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ
τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τῆς
ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου,
Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ μεθέορτον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ
Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα
τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Στείβει θαλάσσης, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς
Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου (ὅρα τὴν
διάταξιν ἐν § 43)· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς
τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄. Δόξα, Ταῖς
ἐξ ἔργων καυχήσεσι, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ
τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
47.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ, τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,

*(Printed Page 336)*

=== LEAF p352 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday after Epiphany with the Triodion (§ 44 concl. – § 47 incipit) (p. 337)]

337

from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Triodion. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Feast, of the Righteous Saint and of
the Saint of the Church, Kontakion "You have appeared today." Apostolos
of the Sunday after Epiphany and Gospel of the Publican and the Pharisee.
At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We
have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
45.    If the Triodion period begins on January 12 or 13, the Service of the
Sunday after Epiphany and of the Triodion is sung as follows: In Vespers
on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at
"Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion
and 3 of the Post-feast "Let us sing, O faithful, a Post-feast hymn" {see
January 12}. Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever the first Theotokion of
the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon. At the
Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever
of the Post-feast "All of nature seeing you" {see Glory of the Stichira of
January 12}. The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Feast, and
Dismissal.
46.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagios Hymn, the "When You, O Lord,
were baptized in Jordan" and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the
Resurrection Apolytikion twice and "When You, O Lord, were baptized in
Jordan" once, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection
Kathismata and those of the Post-feast in place of the Theotokia; the
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon.
The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Feast. After the
3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of
the Triodion and that of the Post-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and
Ikos of the Triodion, and the Minologion of the Saints of the day, and the
Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "Israel passed through," and the
entire order of the Morning Gospel of Matins of the Triodion (see the order
in Paragraph 43); then we sing "More honorable." The Exapostilaria: of
the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Post-feast, Glory of the Triodion "The
boasting on his deeds," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and
"Today salvation."
47.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns
from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Triodion. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast, of the Saint of the Church, the
Kontakion "You have appeared today." Apostolos and Gospel of the
Triodion. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise [the

*(Printed Page 337)*

=== LEAF p353 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday after Epiphany Concluded (§ 47 concl. – § 48); Epistle & Gospel Notes (p. 338)]

338

Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
48.    Εἰ τύχοι ἄρχεσθαι τὸ Τριῴδιον τῇ ΙΔ΄ τοῦ μηνός, ἡ Ἀπόδοσις
τῆς ἑορτῆς προψάλλεται τῇ ΙΓ΄ ἤτοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον λέγεται τοῦ Σαββάτου μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα, ἡ δὲ τῆς Κυριακῆς
τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου Ἀκολουθία μετὰ τῶν Ἀναστασίμων
ψάλλεται ὡς εἴθισται (ὅρα σημ. β΄ ἐν περιπτώσει Β΄ § 16.)

            Σημειώσεις περὶ Ἀποστόλου καὶ Εὐαγγελίου.

Α΄)    Ἐὰν παρέλθῃ ἡ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα Κυριακὴ καὶ μένῃ μία μόνη
μέχρι τῆς Α΄ Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τῇ Κυριακῇ ταύτῃ Ἀπόστολον
λέγομεν τῆς ΛΒ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ζακχαίου.

Β΄)    Ἐὰν μεσολαβῶσι δύο Κυριακαί, τῇ μὲν Α΄ Ἀπόστολον λέγομεν
τῆς ΚΘ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ι΄ Λεπρῶν, τῇ δὲ Β΄ Ἀπόστολον
λέγομεν τῆς ΛΒ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ζακχαίου.

Γ΄)    Ἐὰν μεσολαβῶσι τρεῖς, τῇ μὲν Α΄ Ἀπόστολον λέγομεν τῆς
ΚΘ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ι΄ Λεπρῶν, τῇ δὲ Β΄ Ἀπόστολον
τῆς ΛΒ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ζακχαίου, καὶ τῇ Γ΄ Ἀπόστολον
τῆς ΙΖ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Χαναναίας.

Δ΄)    Ἐὰν δὲ μεσολαβῶσι τέσσαρες Κυριακαί, τῇ μὲν Α΄ Ἀπόστολον
λέγομεν τῆς ΚΘ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ι΄ Λεπρῶν, τῇ δὲ Β΄
Ἀπόστολον τῆς ΛΑ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον Κυριακῆς ΙΓ΄ Λουκᾶ,*
τῇ Γ΄ Ἀπόστολον τῆς ΛΒ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ζακχαίου καὶ
τῇ Δ΄ Ἀπόστολον τῆς ΙΖ΄ Κυριακῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Χαναναίας.

    Σημ. Δεῖ γινώσκειν ὅτι μετὰ τὴν ἀπόδοσιν τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν
Θεοφανείων, ὅταν τὸ Πάσχα ἐστὶν ὄψιμον καὶ ἀποροῦμεν Εὐαγγελίων
διὰ τὰς καθ’ ἡμέραν Λειτουργίας μέχρι τῆς ἐνάρξεως τοῦ Τριῳ-
δίου, ἐὰν πληρωθῇ ἡ σειρὰ τῶν Εὐαγγελίων τοῦ Λουκᾶ,

*(Printed Page 338)*

=== LEAF p354 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday after Epiphany Concluded (§ 47 concl. – § 48); Epistle & Gospel Notes (p. 339)]

339

Lord]," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
48.    If the Triodion period begins on the 14th of the month, the Leave-taking
of the Feast is sung on Saturday the 13th. Apostolos and Gospel are of the
Saturday after Epiphany; the Service of the Sunday of the Publican and the
Pharisee, together with the Sunday Resurrection hymns, are sung as usual
(see Note 2 in Situation Two, Paragraph 16, Page 33 of the Typikon).

                  Notes concerning the Apostolos and Gospel.

1)    If after the Sunday after Epiphany there is only one Sunday until the
First Sunday of the Triodion, on that Sunday we read the Apostolos of the
32nd Sunday [1 Timothy 4:9-15] and the Gospel of Zacchaeus [15th Sunday
of Luke, Luke 19:1-10].
2)    If there are two Sundays, on the first we read the Apostolos of the
29th Sunday [Colossians 3:4-11] and the Gospel of the 10 Lepers [12th
Sunday of Luke, Luke 17:12-19], and on the second we read the Apostolos
of the 32nd Sunday [1 Timothy 4:9-15] and the Gospel of Zacchaeus [15th
Sunday of Luke, Luke 19:1-10].
3)    If there are three Sundays, on the first we read the Apostolos of the
29th Sunday [Colossians 3:4-11] and the Gospel of the 10 Lepers, [12th
Sunday of Luke, Luke 17:12-19], on the second we read the Apostolos of the
32nd Sunday [1 Timothy 4:9-15] and the Gospel of Zacchaeus, [15th
Sunday of Luke, Luke 19:1-10], and on the third the Apostolos of the 17th
Sunday [2nd Corinthians 6:16 - 7:1] and the Gospel of the Canaanite Woman
[17th Sunday of Matthew, Matthew 15:21-28].
4)    If there are four Sundays, on the first we read the Apostolos of the
29th Sunday [Colossians 3:4-11] and the Gospel of the 10 Lepers; [12th
Sunday of Luke, Luke 17:12-19]; on the second we read the Apostolos of
the 31st Sunday [1 Timothy 1:15-17] and Gospel of the 13th Sunday of Luke
[Young Man, Luke 18:18-27],* on the third Sunday the Apostolos of the
32nd Sunday [1 Timothy 4:9-15] and the Gospel of Zacchaeus [15th Sunday
of Luke, Luke 19:1-10], and on the fourth the Apostolos of the 17th Sunday
[2nd Corinthians 6:16 - 7:1] and the Gospel of the Canaanite Woman [17th
Sunday of Matthew, Matthew 15:21-28].

    Note: It is important to know that after the Leave-taking of the Feast
of Epiphany, when Easter is late and we have a shortage of Gospels for the
daily Liturgy until the beginning of the Triodion period, if the sequence of
the Gospel of Luke has been gone through completely, we calculate for the

*(Printed Page 339)*

=== LEAF p355 ===
[Original Greek Text: Gospel Note Concluded; Hypapante Katavasiai; St. Anthony the Great (§ 1–3 incipit) (p. 340)]

340

ἀπαριθμοῦμεν εἰς τὸ ἔτος, ἐν ᾧ εὑρισκόμεθα, πόσαι ἑβδομάδες
τοῦ Ματθαίου πρὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Ὑψώσεως ἔμειναν, καὶ
ἀναγινώσκομεν τὴν σειρὰν ταύτην, ἕως οὗ ἄρξηται τὸ Τριῴδιον·
τὸ αὐτὸ ποιοῦμεν καὶ διὰ τοὺς Ἀποστόλους.
Ε΄)    Μετὰ τὴν τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Θεοφανείων Ἀπόδοσιν, τῇ Α΄
τυχούσῃ Κυριακῇ ἢ ἑορτῇ, ἄρχονται αἱ Καταβασίαι τῆς
Ὑπαπαντῆς Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν
παρθενικήν.

Τῇ ΙΖ΄.    Τοῦ Ὁσίου πατρὸς ἡμῶν Ἀντωνίου τοῦ
Μεγάλου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ὁσίου ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς,
ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν
ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ὁσίου, Καὶ νῦν
τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον
καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρά, Δόξα, τοῦ Ὁσίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ὁσίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ
Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ τὰ τῆς γ΄
Στιχολογίας τοῦ Ὁσίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ
Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ
Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ὁσίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸ
Κάθισμα τοῦ Ὁσίου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ
Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον
καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν
τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Ὁσίου
καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου

*(Printed Page 340)*

=== LEAF p356 ===
[English Facing Translation: Gospel Note Concluded; Presentation Katavasiai; St. Anthony the Great (§ 1–3 incipit) (p. 341)]

341

current year how many weeks of the Gospel of Matthew remain before the
Sunday before the Elevation of the Cross, and we read these, until the
Triodion begins; we do the same for the Apostolos Readings.

5)    After the Leave-taking of the Feast of Epiphany, on the first Sunday
or Feast, we begin the Katavasie of the Presentation "The sun once shone"
and the Kontakion "You who have sanctified by Your birth a virgin womb."

The 17th.    Our Holy Father Anthony the Great.

1.    If the Feast of the Righteous Saint occurs on any day except Sunday,
his Service is sung according to the Order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we
sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Righteous Saint, Glory of
the Righteous Saint, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode.
Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the
Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Righteous Saint, Now
and ever, "Unwedded Virgin." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the
Righteous Saint, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Righteous Saint and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion of the Righteous Saint and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the
Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The
Resurrection Kathismata of the order, and in the 3rd Stasis [Stichologia] that
of the Righteous Saint with the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the
Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrec-
tion and of the Righteous Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and
Kathisma of the Righteous Saint and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie
"The sun once shone," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we
sing "More honorable." The Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the
Righteous Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira
and 4 of the Righteous Saint. Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most
blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

*(Printed Page 341)*

=== LEAF p357 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. Anthony the Great (§ 3 concl. – § 6); Sunday in Triodion (p. 342)]

342

δ΄.    Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ὁσίου· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ὁσίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ,
καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ
ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ
Ὁσίου γ΄, Δόξα, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου.
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ
Ὁσίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, τοῦ Ὁσίου,
Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ὁσίου, τὸ
Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
6.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ
Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος·
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ τὰ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας
τοῦ Ὁσίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος,
ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ὁσίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, εἶτα Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ
Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον
τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον
ἀβυσσοτόκον, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις
τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ
Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄ τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ
Ὁσίου. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία
Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία. Ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ ψάλλονται τὰ Τυπικὰ
καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου ἕτερα
δ΄. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Κοινωνικὸν
Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ὁσίου Ἀντωνίου δύναται νὰ
συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ

*(Printed Page 342)*

=== LEAF p358 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. Anthony the Great (§ 3 concl. – § 6); Sunday in Triodion (p. 343)]

343

4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns
from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Righteous Saint. After the Entrance,
the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Righteous Saint and of the Saint
of the Church, Kontakion "You who have sanctified by Your birth a virgin
womb." Apostolos of the Righteous Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At
"Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]", "We
have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
5.    If the Feast of the Righteous Saint occurs on the Sunday of the
Publican and the Pharisee, on Saturday evening, following the Introductory
Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the
Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Righteous Saint, Glory of the
Triodion, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O
Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Righteous Saint.
At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Righteous Saint,
Now and ever of the Triodion. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the
Righteous Saint, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
6.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Righteous Saint and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the
Ypakoi and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in
Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata
in order, and in the 3rd Stasis [Stichologia] that of the Righteous Saint with
the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and
the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the
Righteous Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the
Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the Triodion, the Righteous Saint and the
Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, and
the Minologion of the Righteous Saint, and the Postscript of the Triodion.
The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the entire order of the Morning
Gospel of Matins of the Triodion. Then we sing "More honorable." The
Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Righteous
Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the
Triodion and 3 of the Righteous Saint. Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever,
"Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation." In the Liturgy, the
Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the
Canon of the Triodion. Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday.
Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]", "We have seen the [true] light,"
and Dismissal.

    It should be noted that the commemoration of the Righteous
Anthony may occur from the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee until

*(Printed Page 343)*

=== LEAF p359 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. Anthony Note Concluded; SS. Athanasius & Cyril (§ 1–4) (p. 344)]

344

Φαρισαίου μέχρι τοῦ Σαββάτου τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος. (Ὅρα τὸν
τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακα).

Τῇ ΙΗ΄.    Τῶν ἐν ἁγίοις πατέρων ἡμῶν Ἀθανασίου καὶ
Κυρίλλου Πατριαρχῶν Ἀλεξανδρείας.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς,
ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτῶν ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ ἄνευ Τριῳδίου, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτῶν
ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ τυπικὴν Διάταξιν τῆς ἑορτῆς
τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀντωνίου ὅρα § 2, 3, 4.
3.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ Τριῳδίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας
μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων
δ΄. Δόξα, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος,
Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρά, Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου· τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τῶν Ἁγίων, τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ
Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος·
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ τὸ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας
τῶν Ἁγίων μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος,
ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ οἱ τῶν Ἁγίων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τῶν Ἁγίων
καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ
Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου· αἱ
Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ
Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν
τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τῶν
Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄ τοῦ Τριῳ-
δίου β΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη,
Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία. Ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ
ψάλλονται τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς
ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου ἕτερα δ΄. Ἀπόστολος τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς

*(Printed Page 344)*

=== LEAF p360 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. Anthony Note Concluded; SS. Athanasius & Cyril (§ 1–4) (p. 345)]

345

the Saturday of that week. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

The 18th.    Our Fathers Among the Saints Athanasios and
Cyril, Patriarchs of Alexandria.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day except
Sunday, their Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on a Sunday outside the
Triodion period, their Service is sung according to the Sunday order of the
Feast of Saint Anthony (see Paragraphs 2, 3, 4).
3.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on a Sunday within the
Triodion period, in Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introduc-
tory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the
Resurrection, 2 of the Triodion and 4 of the Saints. Glory of the Triodion,
Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome
Light," the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory
of the Saints, Now and ever of the Triodion. The Apolytikia: of the
Resurrection, of the Saints, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
4.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Liti
of the Saints, the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Ypakoi and
the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; [then]
the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and the
third Stasis [Stichologia] of the Saints with the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria,
the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon; the Canons of
the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the Triodion,
the Saints and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of
the Triodion, and the Minologion of the Saints and the Postscript of the
Triodion. The Katavasie "The sun once shone," and the entire order of the
Morning Gospel of the Triodion; then we sing "More honorable."
Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, of the Saints and the
Theotokion. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Triodion and
3 of the Saints, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great
Doxology and "Today salvation." In the Liturgy are sung the Typika and
4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the
Triodion. Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday, Communion
Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 345)*
