=== LEAF p431 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation I (§§ 1–2) (p. 416)]

416

ΜΗΝ ΜΑΡΤΙΟΣ

Τῇ θ΄. Τῶν ἁγίων Μ΄ Μαρτύρων.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Μαρτύρων τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῇ Τρίτῃ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τῶν ἁγίων Προσόμοια Φέροντες τὰ παρόντα γενναίως γ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Προσόμοιον Σταυροθεοτοκίον, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῶν Ἀποστίχων δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σταυροθεοτοκίον, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε κτλ. καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἀντὶ Λιτῆς λέγονται τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῶν Αἴνων καὶ ἓν Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων μετὰ τοῦ καταλλήλου Θεοτοκίου· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων δὶς καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας, τὰ Καθίσματα τῶν Ἁγίων κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Θαυμαστὸς ὁ Θεὸς ἐν τοῖς Ἁγίοις αὐτοῦ, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῶν Ἁγίων, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν ἀθλοφόρων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ ἰδιόμελον Προφητικῶς ἀνεβόα. Ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Θεοτόκου Ὑγρὰν διοδεύσας καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα κτλ. ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια, οἱ Αἶνοι, Δόξα, Ἀθλοφόροι Χριστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Μακαρίζομέν σε, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι λιταί, ἐν αἷς λέγομεν Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὰς ἀλγηδόνας τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ Κοντάκιον Πᾶσαν Στρατιάν. Εἰς τὴν Θ΄ Ὥραν ψάλλονται οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους ἐν περιπτώσει Η΄ § 14.

*(Printed Page 416)*

=== LEAF p432 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation One (§§ 1–2) (p. 417)]

417

MARCH

The 9th    The Holy Forty Martyrs [who were martyred on a Lake of Sebastea.]

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Commemoration of the Martyrs occurs on Wednesday of the First Week of Lent, on Tuesday morning, after the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing the three Prosomia of the order of the Triodion and the three Prosomia of the Saints "Bravely enduring the sufferings of the present life," Glory, Now and ever the Prosomion Stavrotheotokion, "O Gladsome Light," and the Readings of the day. At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon of the Aposticha twice, and the Martyrikon; Glory, Now and ever the Stavrotheotokion; then "Lord, now let," the Trisagion, "Hail, Theotokos Virgin" etc., and Dismissal.
2.    On Wednesday morning, after the 50th Psalm, instead of the Liti we say the Idiomela of the Praises and one Glory of the Saints with its appropriate Theotokion; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saints and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion of the Saints twice and the Theotokion; then the Psalter of the day, the Kathismata of the Saints in order, the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon "God is wondrous in His Saints." Then "Let everything that has breath" and the Matins Gospel of the Saints, Psalm 50 read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of the arm-bearing," "Now and ever, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "Have mercy on me, O God" and the Idiomelon "David cried out prophetically in the psalms." The Canon of the Theotokos "Traversing upon water" and that of the Saints. After the Third Ode, the Kathisma etc.; after the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints, the Minologion; the Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," then "More honorable." The Exapostilaria, the Praises, Glory, "O martyrs of Christ," Now and ever, "We bless you," Great Doxology, the Apolytikion of the Saints, and the Hours are plainly read, at which we say the Apolytikion "By reason of the sufferings of Your Saints" and the Kontakion "Every army." At the 9th Hour the Beatitudes and the rest of the service are sung as prescribed in Situation 8, Paragraph 14 of the Feast of Saint Charalampos.

*(Printed Page 417)*

=== LEAF p433 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation I Concl. (§§ 3–4); Dietary Note; Situation II (§§ 4 bis–5) (p. 418)]

418

3.    Εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Νηστεύσαντες ἀδελφοὶ δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν· τὰ γ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου Προσόμοια, καὶ δ΄ τῶν Ἁγίων. Δόξα, Ἐν ᾠδαῖς ἀσμάτων, Καὶ νῦν, Προσόμοιον, θεοτοκίον, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων. Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Α΄ καὶ Γ΄ ἑβδομάδος, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς Προηγιασμένης τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῆς ἡμέρας δίς, τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, τὰ γ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς Προσόμοια καὶ δ΄ τῶν Ἁγίων. Δόξα, τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν, Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον κτλ. ὡς ἀνωτέρω.
    Ἐν οἱᾳδήποτε ἡμέρᾳ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος καὶ ἂν τύχῃ ἡ ἑορτή, γίνεται κατάλυσις οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου.

Β΄.

4. (δίς).    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Τετάρτῃ πρωῒ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῆς ἡμέρας δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, τὰ γ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου Προσόμοια καὶ δ΄ τῶν Ἁγίων. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτοκίον Προσόμοιον. Εἴσοδος μετὰ θυμιατοῦ, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων, Κοινωνικὸν Γεύσασθε καὶ ἴδετε, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωΐ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου μέχρι τῆς Δοξολογίας, αἱ Ὧραι καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ ψάλλονται κατὰ τὴν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2, 3 διάταξιν. Ἐν δὲ τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ τῶν Ἀποστίχων Ἰδιόμελον Οἱ ποθοῦντες τοῦ θείου Πάσχα μετασχεῖν δίς, τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια, καὶ τὰ τῶν Ἁγίων Φέροντες τὰ παρόντα δ΄. Δόξα, Ἐν ᾠδαῖς ἀσμάτων, Καὶ νῦν, Προσόμοιον Σταυροθεοτοκίον, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας· τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς Β΄ καὶ Γ΄ ἑβδομάδος, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῶν

*(Printed Page 418)*

=== LEAF p434 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation One Concl. (§§ 3–4); Dietary Note; Situation Two (§§ 4 bis–5) (p. 419)]

419

3.    In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord" at "Lord, I have cried" we sing the Idiomelon "Having fasted, brethren" twice and the Martyrikon; the three Prosomia of the order of the Triodion, and the four of the Saints. Glory, "O faithful, let us praise in songs," Now and ever the Prosomion Theotokion. Entrance with the Gospel, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise," the Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints and then the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts, Communion Hymn "In eternal memorial," "I will bless the Lord" and Dismissal.
4.    On Wednesday of the First and Third Week, at Vespers of the Pre-sanctified, we chant the Idiomelon of the day twice, the Martyrikon once, the three Prosomia of the sequence and the four of the Saints. Glory of the Saints, Now and ever the Prosomion Theotokion, etc., as above.
    No matter on which day of the First Week the Feast occurs, the consumption of wine and oil is allowed.

SITUATION TWO

4. (dup.)    If the Feast occurs on Thursday of this week, Wednesday morning at Vespers after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried," the Idiomelon of the day twice, and the Martyrikon, the three Prosomia of the Triodion of the sequence and four of the Saints. Glory, Now and ever, Theotokion Prosomion. Entrance with the censer, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise" and the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts follows. Communion Hymn "Taste and see," "I will bless the Lord" and Dismissal.
5.    On Thursday morning, the Service of Matins until the Doxology, and the Hours and the rest are sung according to the order of Situation One, Paragraphs 2 and 3. In Vespers after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried," the Idiomelon "Those who desire to share in the Divine Pascha" twice, the Martyrikon, the three Prosomia and those of the Saints "Bravely enduring the sufferings of the present life" in four by repeating the first, Glory, "O faithful, let us praise in songs," Now and ever, the Prosomion Stavrotheotokion, Entrance with the Gospel, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise," the Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints and then the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified. Communion Hymn "In eternal memorial," "I will bless the Lord" and Dismissal.
    On Thursday of the Second and Third Week, the Idiomelon of the

*(Printed Page 419)*

=== LEAF p435 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation II Concl.; Situation III (§ 6); Situation IV (§ 7) (p. 420)]

420

Ἀποστίχων τῆς ἡμέρας δίς, τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, τὰ γ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς Προσόμοια, καὶ δ΄ τῶν Ἁγίων. Δόξα, τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν, Προσόμοιον Σταυροθεοτοκίον κτλ. ὡς ἀνωτέρω.

Γ΄.

6.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωῒ ὁ Ἑσπερινὸς ψάλλεται, ὡς προδιετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 1. Τῇ δὲ Παρασκευῇ πρωῒ ὁ Ὄρθρος μέχρι τῆς Δοξολογίας, καὶ αἱ Ὧραι ψάλλονται, ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2. Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δεῦτε πιστοὶ δίς, δ΄ Προσόμοια τῶν μαρτύρων, καὶ δ΄ τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου. Δόξα, Ἐν ᾠδαῖς ἀσμάτων, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου. Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας· τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, εἶτα Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων. Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκονται οἱ Οἶκοι τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὡς εἴθισται, Κοντάκιον Πίστιν Χριστοῦ.
    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς Β΄, Γ΄ καὶ Δ΄ ἑβδομάδος, ἡ αὐτή ἐστι τῆς Ἀκολουθίας διάταξις (ἐξαιρουμένων ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς Προηγιασμένης τῶν Στιχηρῶν τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου), ψάλλεται δὲ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῆς ἡμέρας δίς, τὰ δ΄ τοῦ ἤχου Μαρτυρικὰ καὶ δ΄ τῶν Ἁγίων. Δόξα, τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου κτλ. ὡς ἀνωτέρω.

Δ΄.

7.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωῒ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δεῦτε πιστοὶ δίς, δ΄ Προσόμοια τῶν Μαρτύρων καὶ δ΄ τοῦ ἁγίου Θεοδώρου, Δόξα, Ὀργάνῳ χρησάμενος, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου, Εἴσοδος μετὰ θυμιατοῦ. Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων, Κοινωνικὸν Γεύσασθε, Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 420)*

=== LEAF p436 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation Two Concl.; Situation Three (§ 6); Situation Four (§ 7) (p. 421)]

421

day is sung twice, the Martyrikon once, the three Prosomia of the sequence and the four of the Saints. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, the Prosomion Stavrotheotokion, etc., as above.

SITUATION THREE

6.    If the Feast occurs on Friday of this week, on Thursday morning the Vespers is chanted as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 1. On Friday morning, we chant Matins until the Doxology and the Hours as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 2. In Vespers after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried" the Idiomelon "Come, O faithful" is sung twice, four Prosomia of the Martyrs and four of Saint Theodore. Glory, "O faithful, let us praise in songs," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the current Mode. Entrance with the Gospel, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise," the Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints; and then follows the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts. Communion Hymn "In eternal memorial," "I will bless the Lord" and Dismissal. In the evening, the Iki of the Theotokos are read, as is the custom, and the Kontakion "Your faith in Christ was like a breastplate".
    On Friday of the Second, Third and Fourth Week, the following is the Order of the Service (excluding in the Vespers of the Pre-sanctified the Stichira of Saint Theodore), Idiomelon of the day is then chanted twice, as well as the four Martyrika of the Mode and the four of the Saints. Glory of the Saints, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the current Mode etc., as above.

SITUATION FOUR

7.    If the Feast occurs on Saturday of the First Week, on Friday morning at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried" we chant the Idiomelon "Come, O faithful" twice, the four Prosomia of the Martyrs and four of Saint Theodore, Glory, "Having used as an organ," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the current Mode. Entrance with the censer, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise" and then the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts follows. Communion Hymn "Taste and see," "I will bless the Lord" and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 421)*

=== LEAF p437 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation IV Concl.; Situation V Opening (§§ 8–9) (p. 422)]

422

Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκονται οἱ Οἶκοι τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὡς εἴθισται, Κοντάκιον Πᾶσαν στρατιάν.
Τῷ δὲ Σαββάτῳ πρωῒ ὁ Ὄρθρος μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου ψάλλονται, ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν τῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Χαραλάμπους ἑορτῇ, ἐν περιπτώσει ΙΒ΄ § 21. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ἁγίων. Κοινωνικόν, Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ε΄.

8.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων τῇ Α΄, Β΄, Γ΄, Δ΄ καὶ Ε΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄, καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων Προφητικῶς ἀνεβόων, Καὶ νῦν, (ἐν τῇ Β΄, Δ΄ καὶ Ε΄ Κυριακῇ Ὢ θαύματος καινοῦ, ἐν δὲ τῇ Α΄ Κυριακῇ καὶ τῇ Γ΄ τὰ Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου), τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον (ἐν δὲ τῇ Α΄ καὶ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Μαρτύρων καὶ ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων τὰ τοῦ Τριῳδίου Τὴν ἄχραντον εἰκόνα σου, ἢ τὸ Σῶσον Κύριε τὸν λαόν σου), καὶ ἡ Ἀπόλυσις.
9.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, εἶτα ἡ Λιτή, Δόξα, τῶν Ἁγίων Ἐν ᾠδαῖς ἀσμάτων, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος (ἐν τῇ Α΄ Κυριακῇ, Καὶ νῦν, Χαίρετε Προφῆται τίμιοι ἐν δὲ τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ Ὁρῶσά σε ἡ κτίσις ἅπασα) καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Μαρτύρων (ἀντὶ τούτου ἐν τῇ Α΄ Κυριακῇ Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὴν ἄχραντον εἰκόνα σου, ἐν δὲ τῇ Γ΄ Σῶσον Κύριε τὸν λαόν σου) καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ τὸ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας τῶν Ἁγίων (ἐν δὲ τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τὸ τελευταῖον τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίου, τὸ Ἐν Παραδείσῳ μὲν τὸ πρίν), εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου (ἐν τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων)· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ

*(Printed Page 422)*

=== LEAF p438 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation Four Concl.; Situation Five Opening (§§ 8–9) (p. 423)]

423

In the evening the Iki of the Theotokos are read, as is the custom, and the Kontakion "Every army."
On Saturday morning, the Matins with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are sung, as prescribed in Situation 12, Paragraph 21 of the Feast of Saint Charalampos. In the Liturgy, Apostolos of the Triodion and Gospel of the Saints, Communion Hymn "In eternal memorial," "We have seen the [true] light" and Dismissal.

SITUATION FIVE

8.    If the Feast of the Saints occurs on the First, Second, Third, Fourth or Fifth Sunday of Lent, on Saturday evening, after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried" we sing four Resurrection hymns of the Mode of the week, three of the Triodion, and three of the Saints, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the current Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Prokimenon. The Resurrection Aposticha Stichira, Glory of the Saints "David cried out prophetically" Now and ever, (on the 2nd, 4th or 5th Sunday "O wondrous event"; on the 1st and 3rd Sunday those {the Now and ever hymns} of the Triodion). Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saints, of the Triodion and the Theotokion on the 1st and 3rd Sunday, Apolytikia of the Resurrection, that of the Martyrs and instead of the Theotokia the Apolytikia of the Triodion "Your most pure image" or "O Lord, save Your people"), and the Dismissal.
9.    On Sunday morning, at Matins after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, then the Liti, Glory of the Saints "O faithful, let us praise in songs," Now and ever, "Theotokos, you are the true vine" (on the 1st Sunday, Now and ever, "Hail sacred prophets," on the 3rd Sunday "All of creation seeing you") and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Martyrs (this is replaced on the 1st Sunday with "Your most pure image" and on the 3rd Sunday with "O Lord, save Your people"), and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and the third Stasis [Stichologia] of the Saints (on the 3rd Sunday, the last one of the Saints, and instead of the Theotokion "In Paradise of old." Then the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. Canons of the Resurrection, of the Saints and the Triodion (on the 3rd Sunday the Canon of the Triodion then that of the Saints). After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathismata of the

*(Printed Page 423)*

=== LEAF p439 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation V Concl. (§§ 9–10); Situation VI (§ 11) (p. 424)]

424

Οἶκος, τὰ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι ἐν μὲν τῇ Α΄ καὶ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, ἐν δὲ τῇ Β΄, Δ΄ καὶ Ε΄ Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου. Εἶτα Στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἐν μὲν τῇ Α΄ καὶ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τῶν Μαρτύρων γ΄, ἐν δὲ τῇ Β΄ μετὰ τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα ἔρχονται τὰ τῶν Μαρτύρων καὶ ἕπονται τὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῶν ἁρμοδίων Στίχων· καὶ ἐν τῇ Δ΄ καὶ Ε΄ Ἀναστάσιμα ε΄ καὶ τῶν Μαρτύρων γ΄, ὧν οἱ Στίχοι ἐν τοῖς δυσὶ τελευταίοις Τροπαρίοις Θαυμαστὸς ὁ Θεὸς ἐν τοῖς Ἁγίοις αὐτοῦ, καὶ Τοῖς Ἁγίοις τοῖς ἐν τῇ γῇ αὐτοῦ ἐθαυμάστωσεν ὁ Κύριος, Δόξα, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
10.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄ (ἐν δὲ τῇ Α΄ καὶ τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τὰ Ἀντίφωνα ὡς εἰσιν ὡρισμένα· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, ἐν μὲν τῇ Α΄ καὶ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ· ἐν δὲ ταῖς λοιπαῖς Κυριακαῖς, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον τῶν Ἁγίων, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, Ἀπόστολος τῶν τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου· Κοινωνικὸν ἐν τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ Ἐσημειώθη ἐφ᾿ ἡμᾶς, ἐν ταῖς λοιπαῖς Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, ἐν δὲ τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ Σῶσον Κύριε, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις
ΣΤ΄.
11.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Β΄, Γ΄, Δ΄, Ε΄, καὶ ΣΤ΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Στιχηρὰ ς΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τῶν Ἁγίων. Δόξα, Τὴν λίμνην ὡς παράδεισον, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτοκίον Ἔργοις σκοτεινοῖς, Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Μέγα Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον ἀργῶς δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ. Δόξα Προφητικῶς ἀνεβόα, Καὶ νῦν Τὴν πᾶσαν ἐλπίδα μου, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια Τὰς ἀλγηδόνας τῶν ἁγίων, Τοῦ Γαβριὴλ φθεγξαμένου σοι, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Τὸ Θεοτόκε παρθένε οὐ ψάλλεται διὰ τὸ τελεῖσθαι αὔριον Προηγιασμένην.

*(Printed Page 424)*

=== LEAF p440 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 9: The Holy Forty Martyrs; Situation Five Concl. (§§ 9–10); Situation Six (§ 11) (p. 425)]

425

Triodion, of the Saints and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, the Minologion of the Saints and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie on the 1st and 3rd Sunday those of the Triodion, on the 2nd, 4th or 5th Sunday "I shall open my mouth." Then "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, of the Saints and the Theotokion. At the Praises: on the 1st and 3rd Sunday, we chant 2 hymns of the Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Martyrs; on the 2nd Sunday, after those of the Resurrection, we chant those of the Martyrs and then those of the Saints with the appropriate verses; on the 4th and 5th Sundays, we chant 5 hymns of the Resurrection and 3 of the Martyrs with the following Verses at the last two: "God is wondrous in His Saints" and "As for the saints who are on the earth, they are the excellent ones, in whom is all my delight." Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation".
10.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 of the Saints (on the 1st and 3rd Sundays, we chant the Antiphons as they are prescribed); after the Entrance on the 1st and 3rd Sundays, the Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, of the Saints and of the Saint of the Church; on the other Sundays, the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Saints, of the Triodion and of the Saint of the Church. Kontakion "To the Champion General," Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday, and the Liturgy of Saint Basil; Communion Hymn on the 3rd Sunday "It was marked on us," on the other Sundays "Praise the Lord," "We have seen the [true] Light," but on the 3rd Sunday "O Lord, save Your people" and Dismissal.

SITUATION SIX

11.    If the Feast occurs on Monday of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th week, on Sunday evening, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing six Stichira, 3 Prosomia of the Triodion, and 3 of the Saints. Glory, "The lake as Paradise," Now and ever, Theotokion "Dark works." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Great Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon is sung twice slowly, and the Martyrikon once. Glory, "David cried out prophetically," Now and ever, "My entire hope." Then "Now let Your servant depart," and the Trisagion. The Apolytikia: "By reason of the sufferings of Your Saints." "As Gabriel cried unto you," and Dismissal. The Hymn "Theotokos Virgin " is not sung because tomorrow the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts will be celebrated.

*(Printed Page 425)*
