=== LEAF p451 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation I (§§ 2–4) (p. 436)]

436

Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων. Τὸ ἑσπέρας τὸ Μέγα Ἀπόδειπνον ὡς εἴθισται.
2.    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, τὰ Κατανυκτικὰ Τροπάρια Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς Κύριε ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος· μετὰ τὴν Συναπτὴν τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον· τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας, τὰ Κατανυκτικὰ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου Καθίσματα, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ἡ Στιχολογία τῶν Θ΄ Ὠδῶν καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος κανὼν Ὁ Κόσμος περιχαρῶς εὐφράνθητι μετὰ τῶν Τριῳδίων τῆς ἡμέρας· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Προεόρτιον Κάθισμα Σήμερον ἅπασα, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἐπελεύσει Πνεύματος τοῦ Παναγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· μετὰ τοὺς Κανόνας, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς Χεῖρας ἐκπετάσας Δανιὴλ καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ προεόρτιον Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ὡς δῶρα προεόρτια, καὶ τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Ἐκτενῆ, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῶν Ἀποστίχων τῆς ἡμέρας δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ ἔγνω, τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς παγκοσμίου χαρᾶς τὰ προοίμια, καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι λιταί, ἐν αἷς λέγομεν Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ Κοντάκιον τὰ Προεόρτια, καὶ μετὰ τὴν ς΄ Ὥραν Ἀπόλυσις. Ἡ δὲ Θ΄ Ὥρα ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ ἑσπέρας πρὸ τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ ὡς εἴθισται, καὶ λέγομεν Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ Κοντάκιον τὰ Προεόρτια.

Ὁ Μέγας Ἑσπερινός.

3.    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ τρία Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια Βουλὴν προαιώνιον εἰς ἕξ· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Τῷ ἕκτῳ μηνί, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς Εὐαγγέλια, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς Σωτηρίας ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, τὸ Τρισάγιον κτλ. ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου· τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ Καρδία μου, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν (τὸ τελευταῖον ἐκ δευτέρου), οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ

*(Printed Page 436)*

=== LEAF p452 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation One (§§ 2–4) (p. 437)]

437

Compline is performed as usual.
2.    On Thursday morning after the Midnight service, the Penitential Hymns "Have mercy on us, Lord have mercy on us," and the Exapsalmos; after the Litany, we chant "God is the Lord" with its verses and the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast; the Psalter of the day, the Penitential Kathismata of the Octoichos and of the Triodion, Psalm 50, the hymns of the 9 Odes and the Canon of the Pre-feast "The world joyfully praises" together with the Triodion Canon of the day. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Pre-feast "Today all of creation hails"; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion "Through the descent of the Holy Spirit" and the Minologion of the Saints of the day; after the Canons, the Irmos of the 8th Ode "Daniel stretched out his hands" and "More honorable." The Exapostilarion of the Pre-feast "As pre-festal gifts," the Lesser Doxology "To You belongs glory," and after the petitions, we chant the Idiomelon of the Aposticha of the day (twice) and that of the Martyrs (once). Glory, Now and ever, "The language that I knew not." Then "It is good to give thanks," the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Today is the prelude of joy for the whole world," and the Hours are read plainly, in which we use the Apolytikion and Kontakion of the Pre-feast, with the Dismissal after the 6th Hour. The 9th Hour is read in the evening before the Vespers, as is customary, at which we use the Apolytikion and Kontakion of the Pre-feast.

The Great Vespers

3.    On Thursday evening after the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing the 3 Prosomia Stichira "The eternal will" (twice each), Glory, Now and ever, "Sent from heaven." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela "In the sixth month," Glory, Now and ever, "Today marks the crowning of our salvation" (three times), and Dismissal.

4.    Friday at Matins, "Blessed is our God," the Trisagion, etc., the 50th Psalm, the Liti, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord,": the Apolytikion (3 times), the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos "My heart is overflowing" [Psalm 44 (45)]. The Kathismata in order (the last one twice), the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon "Proclaim His salvation from day to day." Then "Let everything that breathes" and the Gospel "In those days Mary arose," Psalm 50 read. Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," Now

*(Printed Page 437)*

=== LEAF p453 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation I Concl. (§§ 4–5 Antiphons 1 & 2) (p. 438)]

438

καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, ὁ Κανὼν εἰς ς΄ ἄνευ Στίχου· εἰς τὰ τελευταῖα Τροπάρια, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Ὁ λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ ἅπαξ, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ καὶ ὁ Οἶκος Ἄγγελος πρωτοστάτης καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ μετὰ τοῦ Μεγαλυναρίου Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ χαρὰν μεγάλην . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ Θεοῦ κιβωτῷ· εἶτα τὰ δύο Ἐξαποστειλάρια. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια Τῶν οὐρανίων ἁψίδων εἰς δ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς Σωτηρίας.

5.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα.

Ἀντίφωνον Α΄
Ὁ Θεὸς τὸ κρῖμά σου τῷ Βασιλεῖ δός, καὶ τὴν δικαιοσύνην σου τῷ Υἱῷ τοῦ Βασιλέως.
Ἀναλαβέτω τὰ ὄρη εἰρήνην τῷ λαῷ, καὶ οἱ βουνοὶ δικαιοσύνην.
    Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου κτλ.
Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας τὸ σωτήριον τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡμῶν.
Ὤμοσε Κύριος τῷ Δαβὶδ ἀλήθειαν, καὶ οὐ μὴ ἀθετήσει αὐτήν.
(Δόξα, Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱῷ καὶ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεί, καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν. Ὁ μονογενὴς Υἱὸς καὶ λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ. Ταῖς πρεσβείαις . . .)

Ἀντίφωνον Β΄
Καταβήσεται ὡς ὑετὸς ἐπὶ πόκον καὶ ὡσεὶ σταγὼν ἡ στάζουσα ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν.
Ἡγίασε τὸ σκήνωμα αὑτοῦ ὁ Ὕψιστος.
    Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ ὁ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθεὶς κτλ.
Ὁ Θεὸς ἐμφανῶς ἥξει, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ οὐ παρασιωπήσεται.
Ἀνατελεῖ ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις αὐτοῦ δικαιοσύνη καὶ πλῆθος εἰρήνης.

*(Printed Page 438)*

=== LEAF p454 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation One Concl. (§§ 4–5 Antiphons 1 & 2) (p. 439)]

439

and ever, repeat the same; then the Verse "Have mercy on me, O God" and the Idiomelon "Today Gabriel announces"; the Canon in six, without verses; at the last hymns we use Glory, Now and ever. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma "The Word of God" (once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion "To the Champion General" and the Ikos "An chief angel was sent" and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the 9th Ode of the Canon is sung with the Megalynarion "O Earth, announce great tidings . . . As a live ark of God"; then the 2 Exapostilaria. At the Praises: the 3 Prosomia "From the heavenly arches" (repeating the first one). Glory, Now and ever, "The mystery before all time," the Great Doxology and the Apolytikion "Today marks the crowning of our salvation."
5.    In the Liturgy the Antiphons.

Antiphon One
Give the king Your judgements, O God, and Your righteousness to the king's Son. (71:1)
The mountains will bring peace to the people, and the little hills, by righteousness. (71:3)
    Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, Savior, save us.
Proclaim the good news of His salvation from day to day. (95:2)
The LORD has sworn in truth to David; He will not turn from it. (131:11)
{Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen. Through the intercessions . . .}

Antiphon Two
He shall come down like rain upon the grass before mowing, like showers that water the earth. (71:6)
The holy place of the tabernacle of the Most High. (45:4b)
    O Son of God, incarnate for our sake, save us who sing to You: Alleluia! c
Our God shall come, and shall not keep silent. (49:3a)
In His days the righteous shall flourish, and abundance of peace. (71:7a)
{Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and

*(Printed Page 439)*

=== LEAF p455 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation I Liturgy Concl. (§ 5 Antiphon 3 & Eisodikon); Apodosis (§§ 6–7) (p. 440)]

440

(Δόξα, Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱῷ καὶ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι. Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεί, καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν. Ὁ μονογενὴς Υἱὸς καὶ λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ.)

Ἀντίφωνον Γ΄
Ἔσται τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ εὐλογημένον εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας.
Εὐλογητὸς Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς τοῦ Ἰσραήλ, ὁ ποιῶν θαυμάσια μόνος.
    Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας ἡμῶν κτλ.
Εὐλογημένον τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα καὶ εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος.
Τὸ Εἰσοδικόν· Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας τὸ σωτήριον τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡμῶν· Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ ὁ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθείς, ψάλλοντάς Σοι Ἀλληλούϊα, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας, τὸ Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, τὸ Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος Ὁ ἁγιάζων καὶ οἱ ἁγιαζόμενοι, τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις συνέλαβεν Ἐλισάβετ, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ χαρὰν μεγάλην . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ Θεοῦ κιβωτῷ· Κοινωνικὸν Ἐξελέξατο Κύριος τὴν Σιών, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

6.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια Βουλὴν προαιώνιον, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου Γαβριὴλ (Ὅρα, τῇ ΚΣΤ΄)· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Τῷ ἕκτῳ μηνί, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια, καὶ μετὰ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις ψάλλεται τὸ Τῇ Ὑπερμάχῳ ἀργῶς καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται οἱ Οἶκοι τῆς Θεοτόκου ὡς εἴθισται· μετὰ τὸ τέλος τῶν Οἴκων, τὸ Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ αὖθις σύντομον, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

7.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ γ΄, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας, τὰ δύο τῆς α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίας Καθίσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, καὶ ὁ Κανὼν

*(Printed Page 440)*

=== LEAF p456 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation One Liturgy Concl. (§ 5 Antiphon 3 & Eisodikon); Leave-taking (§§ 6–7) (p. 441)]

441

ever and unto ages of ages. Amen. O Only-begotten Son and Word of God.}

Antiphon Three
His Name shall endure for ever. (71:17a)
Blessed be the LORD God, of Israel, who alone does wondrous things! (71:18a)
    Today marks the crowning of our salvation, etc.
And blessed be His glorious name forever! (71:19a)
The Entrance Hymn "Proclaim the good news of His salvation from day to day. (95:2) O Son of God, incarnate for our sake, save us who sing to You: Alleluia." The Apolytikion "Today marks the crowning of our salvation," the Kontakion "To the Champion General." The Trisagios Hymn, the Apostolos "For both He who sanctifies and those who are being sanctified" [Hebrews 2:11-18] the Gospel "In those days Elizabeth conceived" (Luke 1:24-38) etc. and the remaining Liturgy of Chrysostom. At "Especially," "O Earth, announce good tidings of great joy: . . . As a live ark of God," Communion Hymn "The Lord has chosen Zion," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal.

The Leave-taking

6.    On Friday evening, following the Introductory Psalm at "Lord I have cried" we chant the 3 Prosomia of the Feast "The eternal will" and the 3 of the Archangel Gabriel (see the 26th of the month); Glory, Now and ever, "Sent from heaven." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela "In the sixth month," Glory, Now and ever, "Today is the announcement of joy," and after "Lord, now let your servant," "To the Champion General" is sung slowly, and, as is customary, the Iki of the Theotokos are read; at the conclusion of the Iki, immediately "To the Champion General" at a quicker tempo, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion 3 times and Dismissal.
7.    Saturday at Matins, following the Midnight Service, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion 3 times, the Psalter of the day, the two Kathismata of the First and Second Stasis of the Feast, Psalm 50 read, the Canons of the Feast and of the Archangel. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathismata of the Archangel "The

*(Printed Page 441)*

=== LEAF p457 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Apodosis Concl. (§§ 7–8); Situation II Opening (§§ 9–10) (p. 442)]

442

τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου Ὁ μέγας Γαβριὴλ καὶ ἕτερον Τῶν ἀσωμάτων λειτουργῶν, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἐξαποστειλάρια. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια τῶν Αἴνων τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Εὐφραινέσθωσαν οἱ Οὐρανοί. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.
8.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς· εἰς τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθείς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ· τὸν Ἀπόστολον (ζήτει Σεπτεμβρίου ς΄) καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον (Νοεμβρίου Η΄). Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Ὁ ποιῶν τοὺς Ἀγγέλους, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Β΄.

9.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Γ΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωῒ εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου Προσόμοια, καὶ γ΄ Προεόρτια Κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, τὸ Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας· τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῶν Ἀποστίχων δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ ἔγνω, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε, Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐπουράνιε, τὸ Παναγία Τριάς, τὸ Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα, τὸ Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Μέγα Ἀπόδειπνον, τῇ δὲ Παρασκευῇ πρωῒ ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς Παραμονῆς καὶ αἱ Ὧραι ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2, μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας Ἀπόλυσις.
10.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, ἐν τῷ Μεγάλῳ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια Βουλὴν προαιώνιον εἰς ἕξ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια· μετὰ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις ψάλλεται τὸ Τῇ Ὑπερμάχῳ ἀργῶς καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ γ΄ Στάσις τῶν Οἴκων τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὡς εἴθισται· μετὰ τὸ τέλος τῶν Οἴκων Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ

*(Printed Page 442)*

=== LEAF p458 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Leave-taking Concl. (§§ 7–8); Situation Two Opening (§§ 9–10) (p. 443)]

443

great Gabriel" and "Of the incorporeal liturgists"; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast and the Minologion of the day. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth" and, following "More honorable," the 2 Exapostilaria of the Feast. At the Praises: the Prosomia of the Praises of the Feast, Glory, Now and ever, "Let the heavens rejoice," the Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.
8.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast; at the Entrance, "O come let us worship . . . incarnate for our sake," the Apolytikion of the Feast, of the Archangel, of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "To the Champion General." The Apostolos (see September 6) and the Gospel [Luke 10:16-21] (see November 8). At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "You make Your angels," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal.

SITUATION TWO

9.    If the Feast occurs on Saturday of the 3rd Week, on Thursday morning, at the Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm at "Lord, I have cried" we chant the 3 Prosomia of the sequence of the Triodion, and the 3 of the Pre-feast "Hidden mystery." Glory, Now and ever, "Gabriel proclaims." {Entrance}, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. The Idiomelon of the Aposticha are sung twice and the Martyrikon once; Glory, Now and ever, "The language that I knew not," the Trisagion, "Theotokos Virgin" "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), "More honorable," "Heavenly King," "All-Holy Trinity," "Blessed be the name," "I will bless the Lord at all times," and Dismissal.
    On that evening the Great Compline is read. On Friday morning, the Matins of the Eve of the Feast and the Hours are sung as prescribed in Situation 1, Paragraph 2; after the Prayer of the 6th Hour the Dismissal.
10.    On Friday evening, in Great Vespers after the Introductory Psalm at "Lord, I have cried," we chant the 3 Prosomia of the Feast "The eternal will" (twice each), Glory, Now and ever, "Sent from heaven." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela, Glory, Now and ever, "Today is the announcement of joy," and after "Lord, now let your servant," "To the Champion General" is sung slowly and the third Stasis of the Iki of the Theotokos is read, as is customary; at the conclusion of the Iki, immediately "To the

*(Printed Page 443)*

=== LEAF p459 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation II Concl. (§§ 10–11 Apodosis); Situation III Opening (§§ 12–13) (p. 444)]

444

σύντομον, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας ἐκ τρίτου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ πρωΐ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου ψάλλεται ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 4, 5.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

11.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ Σταυροῦ γ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄, Δόξα, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν (τοῦ Τριῳδίου), Καὶ νῦν, τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Ὁ συμμαχήσας Κύριε, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς Εὐαγγέλια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Σταυροῦ, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τὸ πρωῒ τῇ Κυριακῇ, ψάλλεται μόνη ἡ τῆς Σταυροπροσκυνήσεως Ἀκολουθία μετὰ τῆς Ἀναστασίμου, ὡς τέτακται ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ.

Γ΄.

12.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωΐ, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς Προηγιασμένης, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἀσώτου δίκην δίς, τὰ δ΄ τοῦ ἤχου Μαρτυρικά, καὶ δ΄ Προεόρτια Κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας τὸ μικρὸν Ἀπόδειπνον, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ (γ΄) Στάσις τῶν Οἴκων τῆς Θεοτόκου, Κοντάκιον μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον Ἐπελεύσει Πνεύματος τοῦ Παναγίου κτλ.
13.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας, τὰ Μαρτυρικὰ τοῦ ἤχου Καθίσματα, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς καὶ ὁ προεόρτιος Κανὼν Ὁ Κόσμος περιχαρῶς καὶ τὰ Τριῴδια τῆς ἡμέρας· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ προεόρτιον Κάθισμα· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἐπελεύσει

*(Printed Page 444)*

=== LEAF p460 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Two Concl. (§§ 10–11 Leave-taking); Situation Three Opening (§§ 12–13) (p. 445)]

445

Champion General" is chanted at a quicker tempo, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Today is the crowning of our salvation" (3 times) and Dismissal.
    On Saturday morning, the Matins of the Feast with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are performed as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 4, 5.

The Leave-taking

11.    On Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the reading from the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Cross and 3 of the Feast, Glory, "O Christ our God" {of the Triodion}, Now and ever of the Feast. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "O Lord, the ally," Now and ever, "Today is the announcement of joy." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Cross, of the Feast and Dismissal.
    On Sunday morning, only the Service of the Veneration of the Cross is chanted together with that of the Resurrection, as prescribed in the Triodion.

SITUATION THREE

12.    If the Feast occurs on the Third Sunday of Lent, Friday morning at Vespers of the Pre-sanctified, after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried" we chant the Idiomelon "In the manner of the Prodigal" (twice), the 4 Martyrika in the Mode of the Week and the 4 of the Pre-feast "Hidden mystery," Glory, Now and ever, "Gabriel announces." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day [Genesis 8:4-21, Proverbs 10:31 - 11:12]. Then "Let my prayer arise" and the rest of the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts.
    In the evening, we perform the Small Compline and we read the {3rd} Stasis of the Ikos to the Theotokos. Kontakion after the Trisagion "Through the descent of the Holy Spirit," etc.
13.    On Saturday at Matins, after the Midnight Service, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast, and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion (twice), the Psalter of the day, the Martyrika Kathismata of the Mode, Psalm 50, the Canon of the Pre-feast "The world joyfully praises" together with the Triodion Canon of the day. After the 3rd Ode,

*(Printed Page 445)*
