=== LEAF p581 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation VIII Concl. (§§ 12 Concl.–13), Situation IX Opening (§ 14) (p. 566)]

566

12.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς Κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀποστολικῶν παραδόσεων, καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Πατέρων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίαν, ἀνὰ ἓν Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος κανών, ὁ τῶν Πατέρων, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Οἶκος, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῶν Πατέρων Φωστῆρες ὑπέρλαμπροι. ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Θείῳ καλυφθείς, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τῶν Πατέρων, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς.
    Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τῶν Πατέρων γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄. Δόξα τῶν Πατέρων, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
13.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Εἰσοδικόν, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Πατέρων, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τὴν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν· Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς· εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Θ΄.

14.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου προψάλλεται τῇ Παρασκευῇ μετὰ τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τῆς Ἀναλήψεως ὡς ἑξῆς· Τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας· μετὰ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα ς΄ καὶ δ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 566)*

=== LEAF p582 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation VIII Concl. (§§ 12 Concl.–13), Situation IX Opening (§ 14) (p. 567)]

567

of the Saints, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever, “Of the apostolic traditions,” and the “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Fathers and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. At the 1st and 2nd Stasis [Stichologia] the Kathismata of the Resurrection, then that of the Saints followed by the Theotokion; and in the 3rd Stasis, the Kathisma of the Saints and the Theotokion. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi and the Prokimenon. The Canon of the Resurrection, that of the Fathers, and that of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints, then the Kathisma of the Saints and that of the Fathers “All-shining luminaries”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Fathers, the Minologion of the Saints, and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie “Covered by a divine cloud,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then we chant “More honorable.” The Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, of the Saints and of the Feast.
    At the Praises: 2 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Stichira of the Fathers, and 3 Stichira of the Saints, Glory of the Fathers, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
13.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, the Entrance Hymn “O come let us worship . . . who is risen from the dead”; after the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Fathers, that of the Saints, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “When, for us, You had fulfilled Your dispensation.” Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise the Lord,” the Apolytikion “You ascended in glory,” “Blessed be the Name” and Dismissal.

SITUATION NINE

14.    If the Feast (May 21) occurs on the Saturday of the Souls, the Service of the Saint is celebrated in anticipation on Friday together with the Service of the Ascension as follows: On Thursday evening after the 1st Stasis of the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Idiomela of the Feast and 4 of the Saints. Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings of the Saints. The Aposticha of the Feast, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikia: of the Feast, of the Saints and again that of the Feast and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 567)*

=== LEAF p583 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation IX Concl. (§§ 15–16), Situation X Opening (§ 17 Opening) (p. 568)]

568

15.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου ὡς καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Κύριε τὸ μυστήριον (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὕψωσα ἐκλεκτὸν ἐκ τοῦ λαοῦ μου, Πᾶσα Πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τοῦ Ἁγίου, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν θεοστέπτων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τοῦ εὐσεβοῦς Κωνσταντίνου ἡ μνήμη (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Θείῳ καλυφθείς· εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων, καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Προσόμοια τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου.
16.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς [τῆς Ἀναλήψεως]. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Σὲ τὴν ὑπὲρ νοῦν, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ πρωΐ, ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Ψυχῶν ὡς ἐστι διατετυπωμένη ἐν τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ. Ἐὰν δὲ ᾖ ὁ ναὸς τοῦ ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου, πρὸ τῆς Λειτουργίας ψάλλεται τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ἡ εὐλόγησις τῶν Ἄρτων, μετὰ τὸ Πλούσιοι ἐπτώχευσαν τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὁ βάθει σοφίας, καὶ ἡ Λειτουργία ὡς συνήθως.

Ι΄.

17.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα ἐκ τοῦ πρώτου ἤχου γ΄, ἐκ τοῦ δευτέρου δ΄ καὶ γ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς Δεῦτε λαοί,

*(Printed Page 568)*

=== LEAF p584 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation IX Concl. (§§ 15–16), Situation X Opening (§ 17 Opening) (p. 569)]

569

15.    On Friday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti and the Glory of the Saints, Now and ever, “O Lord, having fulfilled the mystery” (look for this in the Liti); the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saints, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos of the Saints. The Kathismata of the Saints and those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia. The Anavathmi, the 1st Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “I have raised a chosen one from among my people.” Then “Let everything that breathes,” and the Matins Gospel of the Saints, Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “Through the intercessions of the God-crowned ones,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy on me” and the Idiomelon “Today, the memory of the pious Constantine” (look for this in the Liti). The Canons of the Feast and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saints and that of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints, and the Minologion. The Katavasie “Covered by a divine cloud”; then we sing the 9th Ode of the Feast with its Megalynaria, and that of the Saints with the Verse “Holy One of God.” The Exapostilaria: of the Feast, of the Saints, and again that of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Saints. Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saints.
16.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of the Feast [of the Ascension]. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the Feast, of the Saints, of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion of the Feast. Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints. At “Especially,” “You who are above the human mind and speech,” Communion Hymn of the Feast, the Apolytikion “You ascended in glory,” “Blessed be the name of the Lord” and Dismissal.
    On Friday evening and Saturday morning, the Service of the Saturday of the Souls is chanted as prescribed in the Pentikostarion. If the Parish Church is dedicated to Saint Constantine, before the Liturgy, the Apolytikion of the Saints is sung and the Blessing of the Loaves [Artoclasia] is performed with the “The rich became poor,” the Apolytikion “Out of the depths of wisdom,” and the Liturgy as usual.

SITUATION TEN

17.    If the Feast [May 21] occurs on the Sunday of Pentecost, in Great Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 3 Idiomela of the Feast from Mode I, 4 of Mode II, and 3 Prosomia of the Saints; Glory, Now and ever of the Feast “Come, O you peoples.” Entrance,

*(Printed Page 569)*

=== LEAF p585 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation X Concl. (§§ 17 Concl.–19), Situation XI Opening (§ 20 Opening) (p. 570)]

570

Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα, δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἓν τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὰ γ΄ Ἀπόστιχα Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς· Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
18.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· εἰς τὴν α΄ στιχολογίαν Καθίσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς πρῶτον, εἶτα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ αὖθις τῆς ἑορτῆς· εἰς τὴν β΄ καὶ γ΄ λέγομεν ἀνὰ ἓν τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς· οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Τὸ πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθόν, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα· Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς ἑορτῆς· αἱ Καταβασίαι διπλαῖ, καὶ ἡ θ΄ Ὠδή, τὸ α΄ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.
19.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς [τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς], τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστόν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Μὴ τῆς φθορᾶς, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς Τὸ πνεῦμά σου τὸ Ἅγιον, τὸ Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστέ, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, Ἀπόλυσις καὶ ἀκολούθως ὁ Ἑσπερινὸς τῆς Γονυκλισίας.

ΙΑ΄.

20.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τοῦ Ἁγίου Πνεύματος, τῇ Κυριακῇ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς Γονυκλισίας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια τῆς ἑορτῆς Παράδοξα σήμερον καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Βασιλεῦ Οὐράνιε κτλ. τῆς Γονυκλισίας, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν

*(Printed Page 570)*

=== LEAF p586 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation X Concl. (§§ 17 Concl.–19), Situation XI Opening (§ 20 Opening) (p. 571)]

571

“O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings: 2 of the Feast and 1 of the Saints. The 3 Aposticha Idiomela of the Feast; Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikia: of the Feast, of the Saints and again of the Feast and Dismissal
18.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Feast, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. At the 1st Stasis [Stichologia]: the Kathismata of the Feast, then those of the Saints and again those of the Feast; at the 2nd and 3rd Stasis, we chant one of the Saints followed by one of the Feast; the Anavathmi, the 1st Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “Your good Spirit.” Then “Let everything that breathes,” and the Matins Gospel of the Feast, Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Apostles,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy on me” and the “Heavenly King.” The Canons of the Feast and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints, then the Kathisma of the Saints and that of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, the Minologion of the Saints, and the Postscript of the Feast. Both [double] Katavasie and the 9th Ode. The Exapostilaria: of the Feast, of the Saints and the other of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Saints. Glory, Now and ever, “Heavenly King,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.
19.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of the Feast {of Pentecost}. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saints, and the Kontakion of the Feast. Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, we chant “As many as have been baptized”; Apostolos and Gospel of the Feast. At “Especially,” “You who without experience of corruption,” Communion Hymn of the Feast “Your good Spirit,” the Apolytikion “Blessed are You, O Christ,” “Blessed be the name of the Lord,” and Dismissal, and immediately the Vespers of the Kneeling [Gonyklisia].

SITUATION ELEVEN

20.    If the Feast [May 21] occurs on the Monday of the Holy Spirit, on Sunday at the Vespers of the Kneeling, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 3 Idiomela of the Feast, “Today all the nations,” and 3 Prosomia of the Saints; Glory, Now and ever, “Heavenly King,” and the rest of the Service of the Kneeling. The Aposticha of the

*(Printed Page 571)*

=== LEAF p587 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation XI Concl. (§§ 20 Concl.–22), Situation XII Opening (§ 23 Opening) (p. 572)]

572

Δεῦτε λαοί, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς αὖθις καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
21.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ Καθίσματα τῆς α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίας τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἐν τῇ γ΄ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Μετὰ τὴν ἔγερσιν Χριστέ (ζήτει τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς). Οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὕψωσα ἐκλεκτὸν ἐκ τοῦ λαοῦ μου, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν θεοστέπτων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τοῦ εὐσεβοῦς Κωνσταντίνου ἡ μνήμη. Οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Τὸ Πανάγιον Πνεῦμα· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Δευτέρας τοῦ Ἁγίου Πνεύματος. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Θείῳ καλυφθείς, καὶ ἡ θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα Ἐν τοῖς Προφήταις ἀνήγγειλας, καὶ γ΄ Προσόμοια [τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς], τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Ὁ τῶν Ἀνάκτων Ἄναξ, Καὶ νῦν, Γλῶσσαί ποτε, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός.
22.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστόν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Χαίροις Ἄνασσα, Κοινωνικὸν Τὸ Πνεῦμά σου τὸ ἀγαθόν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΙΒ΄.

23.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐντὸς τῶν μεθεόρτων, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν· εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ Δεῦτε

*(Printed Page 572)*

=== LEAF p588 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation XI Concl. (§§ 20 Concl.–22), Situation XII Opening (§ 23 Opening) (p. 573)]

573

Feast; Glory of the Saints, Now and ever, “Come, O you peoples.” The Apolytikia: of the Feast, of the Saints and again of the Feast and Dismissal.
21.    On Monday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saints, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast. The Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata: at the 1st and 2nd Stasis, the Kathisma of the Saints and that of the Feast; at the 3rd Stasis, one Kathisma of the Saints followed by “After You had risen from the tomb” (see the Sunday of Pentecost). The Anavathmi, the 1st Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “I have raised a chosen one from among my people.” Then “Let everything that breathes,” and the Matins Gospel of the Saints, Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “Through the intercessions of the God-crowned ones,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy on me” and the Idiomelon “Today, the memory of the pious Constantine.” The Canons of the Feast and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints, the Kathisma of the Saints and that of the Feast “The All-holy Spirit”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, the Minologion of the Saints, and the Postscript of the Monday of the Holy Spirit. The Katavasie “Covered by a divine cloud,” and the 9th Ode of the Feast. The Exapostilaria: of the Feast, of the Saints and the other one of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast “In the prophets You announced” and 3 of the Saints. Glory of the Saints “The King of Kings,” Now and ever, “Tongues in days of old,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion “Blessed are You, O Christ our God.”
22.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of the Feast {of Pentecost}. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saints, and the Kontakion of the Feast. Instead of the Trisagios Hymn we chant “As many as have been baptized,” Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the day. At “Especially,” “Hail, O Queen,” Communion Hymn of the Feast “Your good Spirit,” “We have seen the [true] light,” “Blessed be the name of the Lord” and Dismissal.

SITUATION TWELVE

23.    If the Feast [May 21] occurs on the days of the Post-feast of Pentecost, the Service is celebrated as prescribed in the Mineon together with the Post-feast hymns. In Matins {at the 9th Ode}, we chant “More honorable.” In the Liturgy, we sing the Antiphons of the Feast. At the

*(Printed Page 573)*

=== LEAF p589 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation XII Concl. (§ 23 Concl.), Situation XIII (§ 24), Situation XIV Opening (§§ 25–26 Opening) (p. 574)]

574

προσκυνήσωμεν . . . Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Παράκλητε ἀγαθέ, Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν τοῦ Ἁγίου (Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν), Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς κτλ.

ΙΓ΄.

24.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν τῇ Ἀποδόσει τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, ἡ ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ψάλλεται ἀπαραλλάκτως ὡς ἐν τῇ ἰδίᾳ ἡμέρᾳ· ἀλλ’ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ λέγονται μόνα τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ (ὅρα τὴν διάταξιν ἐν τῇ Ἀποδόσει τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς Ἀναλήψεως § 15, 16), αἱ Καταβασίαι τῆς ἑορτῆς διπλαῖ, ἐν δὲ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς.

ΙΔ΄.

25.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄. Δόξα, Μαρτύρων θεῖος χορός, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα δύο ἐκ τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου καὶ ἓν τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἁγίων Δεῦτε πιστοί, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
26.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῶν Ἁγίων, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου Τῇ νῦν πανηγύρει, καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίαν τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, τὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου· εἰς τὴν γ΄ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου αὐτοῦ, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος κανών, ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων Πάντων, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον

*(Printed Page 574)*

=== LEAF p590 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation XII Concl. (§ 23 Concl.), Situation XIII (§ 24), Situation XIV Opening (§§ 25–26 Opening) (p. 575)]

575

Entrance, “O come let us worship . . . Save us, O Good Comforter.” At “Especially,” “It is meet,” the Communion Hymn of the Saints {“To all the earth,”} and “We have seen the [true] light,” etc.

SITUATION THIRTEEN

24.    If the Feast [May 21] occurs on the Leave-taking of Pentecost, the Service of the Saints is sung together with that of the Feast as on the day of the Feast; but in Vespers, we read only the 3 Readings of the Saints. In Matins (see the order on the Leave-taking of the Feast of the Ascension, Paragraphs 15, 16). Both [double] Katavasie of the Feast. In the Liturgy, Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints and Communion Hymn of the Feast.

SITUATION FOURTEEN

25.    If the Feast [May 21] occurs on the Sunday of All-Saints, in Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of Stichira of All-Saints, and 3 Prosomia of the Saints; Glory, “O divine choir of Martyrs,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings: 2 from the Pentikostarion and 1 of the Saints. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Saints “Come, O you faithful.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of All-Saints, of the Saints, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
26.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of All-Saints, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Pentikostarion “Unto the present festival,” and the “It is meet.” Then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saints, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. At the 1st and 2nd Stasis [Stichologia], we chant the Kathismata of the Resurrection, of the Saints with the Theotokion of the Pentikostarion; at the 3rd Stasis, the Kathisma of the Saints followed by its Theotokion. Evlogitaria, Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of All-Saints and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints, then the Kathisma of All-Saints, and that of the Saints with its Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of All-Saints, the

*(Printed Page 575)*
