=== LEAF p561 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation I Concl. (§§ 2 Concl.–3), Situation II Opening (§§ 4–5 Opening) (p. 546)]

546

Ἰωάννη, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα· Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὰ γ΄ τῶν Μυροφόρων Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ· Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα . . . Φωτίζου, φωτίζου, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Εἰ τύχοι οἱαδήποτε ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῶν Μυροφόρων. (Ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Ἁγίου Γεωργίου § 19-22 καὶ τὴν ὑποσημείωσιν).
    Εἰ τύχοι ταῖς ἑπομέναις δυσὶ Κυριακαῖς καὶ ταῖς λοιπαῖς τῶν ἑβδομάδων τούτων ἡμέραις, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ ἁγίου Γεωργίου ἐν § 23-26 καὶ 33.

Β΄.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, τῇ Τρίτῃ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα, β΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἓν τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὅτε τὸ μέσον τῆς ἑορτῆς ἐπέστη (ζήτει εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα)· τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ δύο τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀντὶ τῶν

1. Ἐν ταῖς ἑπομέναις Κυριακαῖς, τοῦ Παραλύτου, τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος καὶ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ. Καὶ νῦν, ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα ψάλλονται τὰ τῆς τυχούσης ἀκινήτης ἑορτῆς ἢ Κυριακῆς Δοξαστικά. (Ὅρα Προθεωρ. παρ. 33).

*(Printed Page 546)*

=== LEAF p562 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation I Concl. (§§ 2 Concl.–3), Situation II Opening (§§ 4–5 Opening) (p. 547)]

547

of Resurrection,”¹ Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

3.    In the Liturgy, we sing the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the 3 Apolytikia of the Myrrhbearers, the Apolytikion of the Evangelist, and that of the Saint of the Church, Kontakion “Though You did descend into the grave.” Apostolos of the Evangelist and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried out . . . Shine, shine,” Communion Hymn “Body of Christ,” the Apolytikion “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.
    If the Feast of Saint John the Evangelist occurs on any other day of this week, the Service is sung according to the order of of service of the Mineon with the Post-feast Hymns of the Myrrhbearers. (See the Feast of Saint George Paragraphs 19 - 22 and the footnote).
    If the Feast of Saint John the Evangelist occurs on the following two Sundays and the weekdays following those Sundays, the Service is sung according to the order of service of the Feast of Saint George in Paragraphs 23 - 26 and 33.

SITUATION TWO

4.    If the Feast of Saint John the Evangelist occurs on the Wednesday of Mid-Pentecost, on Tuesday evening, after the Introductory Psalm and the first Stasis of the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Evangelist. Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever of the Feast. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day, and the Readings: 2 of the Feast and 1 of the Evangelist. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela of the Feast, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Evangelist, and again that of the Feast and the Dismissal.
5.    On Wednesday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Evangelist and the Glory, Now and ever of the Feast “When Mid-feast was come” (see the Aposticha); the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos, the 2 Kathismata of the Evangelist and 2 of the Feast in place of the Theotokia. The Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the

1. On the following Sundays — of the Paralytic, the Samaritan Woman and the Blind Man — we sing the Glory of the Saint of the immovable feast. Instead of Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” we sing Now and ever followed by the Glory hymn of the coinciding [movable feast or] Sunday. [See Paragraph 33 of the Protheoria.]

*(Printed Page 547)*

=== LEAF p563 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation II Concl. (§§ 5 Concl.–6), Situation III Opening (§§ 7–8 Opening) (p. 548)]

548

Θεοτοκίων. Οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου. Προκείμενον Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν καὶ τὸ ΙΑ΄ Ἑωθινὸν Εὐαγγέλιον, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τὴν τῶν Ἀποστόλων ἀκρότητα (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν). Οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀμφότεροι καὶ ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Θάλασσαν ἔπηξας, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἡ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ· τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς· Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς νομικῆς. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἀλλότριον τῶν Μητέρων, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Εἰ δὲ τύχοι ἐν τοῖς μεθεόρτοις καὶ τῇ Ἀποδόσει τῆς ἑορτῆς ταύτης, τὴν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Γεωργίου, [Ἀπριλίου 23], § 30-34.

Γ΄.

7.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τυφλοῦ β΄ καὶ δ΄ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Κύριε παράγων ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ, Εἴσοδος, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Στιχηρὸν Σὲ τὸν σαρκωθέντα καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Δικαιοσύνης ἥλιε, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Θεοτοκίον Πάντα ὑπὲρ ἔννοιαν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
8.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς Κανὼν καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Δόξα τοῦ

*(Printed Page 548)*

=== LEAF p564 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation II Concl. (§§ 5 Concl.–6), Situation III Opening (§§ 7–8 Opening) (p. 549)]

549

Prokimenon “To all the earth” and the 11th Eothinon (Matins) Gospel. Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ” and Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Apostle,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy upon me,” and the Idiomelon “O faithful, let us bless the paramount of the Apostles” (look for this in the Liti). Both [the] Canons of the Feast and those of the Evangelist. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Evangelist, the Kathisma of the Evangelist and the one of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, the Minologion and the Postscript of the Feast. The Katavasie “Drowning the prideful Pharaoh,” then are sung the 9th Ode of the Feast and of the Evangelist. The Exapostilaria: of the Feast, of the Evangelist and again of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Evangelist, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever of the Feast; Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.
6.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Easter; after the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and that of the Evangelist, and the Kontakion “Of the lawful feast”; Apostolos of the Evangelist and Gospel of the Feast. At “Especially,” “Virginity is alien to motherhood,” Communion Hymn of the Feast, “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name of the Lord” and Dismissal.
    If the Feast of Saint John the Evangelist occurs on the Post-feast days or on the Leave-taking of this Feast, see Saint George [April 23] Paragraphs 30-34 for the order of the Service.

SITUATION THREE

7.    If the Feast of Saint John the Evangelist occurs on the Sunday of the Blind Man, on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Blind Man and 4 of the Evangelist. Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “Lord, passing by on the way.” Entrance, the Prokimenon, and the Readings of the Evangelist. At the Aposticha: the Stichiron “You, Who was incarnate” and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “O Sun of Righteousness.” The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Evangelist, the Theotokion “Your Mysteries are above human thought” and Dismissal.
8.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Liti

*(Printed Page 549)*

=== LEAF p565 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation III Concl. (§§ 8 Concl.–9), Situation IV Opening (§ 10) (p. 550)]

550

Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Ὅλον τὸν βίον ὁ τυφλός, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ μετὰ τῶν ἀναστασίμων Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα, ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ τὰ β΄ Θεοτοκία· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Τυφλοῦ, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι Τῷ Σωτῆρι Θεῷ, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα ὡς σύνηθες μετὰ τῆς τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῶν β΄ Θεοτοκίων, ὁ Εἱρμὸς Σὲ τὴν ὑπὲρ νοῦν, Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Παράγων ὁ Σωτὴρ ἡμῶν. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ γ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Εὐαγγελιστὰ Ἰωάννη, Καὶ νῦν, Τίς λαλήσει τὰς δυναστείας σου, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
9.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα . . . Φωτίζου φωτίζου, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Δ΄.

10.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Πάσχα, τῇ Τρίτῃ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸ Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοουσίῳ καὶ τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ὡς εἴθισται, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τῆς Ὀκτωήχου Στιχηρὰ Τὰς ἑσπερινὰς ἡμῶν εὐχὰς ς΄ καὶ δ΄ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν παγκόσμιον δόξαν, Εἴσοδος, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ Στιχηρὸν Τῷ πάθει σου Χριστὲ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, αὖθις τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 550)*

=== LEAF p566 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation III Concl. (§§ 8 Concl.–9), Situation IV Opening (§ 10) (p. 551)]

551

of the Evangelist, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “The blind man, accounting all his life as though it were night,” and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Evangelist, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. Kathismata of the Resurrection, of the Evangelist followed by the Resurrection Theotokia. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon; the Canon of Pascha, that of the Evangelist and the 2 Theotokia. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Evangelist, then the Kathisma of the Evangelist and that of the Blind Man; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Blind Man, the Minologion of the day, and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie “Unto the Savior and God,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then the 9th Ode of Pascha as usual, then that of the Saint and the 2 Theotokia, the Irmos “You who are above understanding.” The Exapostilaria: of Pascha, of the Evangelist, and the “Along the way, our Savior found.” At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Stichira of the Evangelist, and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha,” Glory, “O Evangelist John,” Now and ever, “Who can tell of Your mighty acts,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
9.    In the Liturgy, we sing the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha; after the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Evangelist, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion of Easter. Apostolos of the Evangelist and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried out . . . Shine, shine,” Communion Hymn “Body of Christ,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.

SITUATION FOUR

10.    If the Feast of Saint John the Evangelist occurs on the Wednesday of the Leave-taking of Easter, on Tuesday evening, after “Glory to the holy and consubstantial Trinity” and “Christ is risen” as usual, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 6 Stichira of the Octoichos “Accept our evening prayers” and 4 of the Evangelist. Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “The universal glory.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day, and the Readings of the Evangelist. At the Aposticha: the Stichira “By Your Passion, O Christ,” and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” {ending with} the “Christ is risen.” The Apolytikion of the Evangelist, then again “Christ is risen” and the Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 551)*

=== LEAF p567 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation IV Concl. (§§ 11–12), Situation V Opening (§ 13 Opening) (p. 552)]

552

11.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὸ Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ . . . τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη κτλ. ὡς χθές, καὶ τὴν Μεγάλην Συναπτήν, ψάλλεται τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ ΙΑ΄ Ἑωθινὸν Εὐαγγέλιον, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ ἅπαξ, καὶ εὐθὺς Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τὴν τῶν Ἀποστόλων ἀκρότητα, καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἐκφώνησιν Ἐλέει καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς, ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ ἀνὰ δ΄ Τροπάρια· εἰς τὸ τέλος ἑκάστης Ὠδῆς, ἡ Καταβασία, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη γ΄, τὸ Ἀναστὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, καὶ ἡ Αἴτησις· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, εἶτα τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ ἐκ γ΄ καὶ τὸ Ἀναστὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς καὶ ἀκολούθως ἡ ζ΄ καὶ η΄ Ὠδή, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον Σαρκὶ ὑπνώσας, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ αὖθις τὸ Σαρκὶ ὑπνώσας. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ Ὑμνοῦμέν σου Χριστὲ γ΄, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ γ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη γ΄ καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.

12.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι τὸν ὄρθρον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ, τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστόν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα . . . Φωτίζου φωτίζου, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη γ΄ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ε΄.

13.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς Ἀναλήψεως, τῇ Τετάρτῃ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὴν θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα, Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς καὶ ὁ Προοιμιακός. Εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ εἰς δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς.

*(Printed Page 552)*

=== LEAF p568 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation IV Concl. (§§ 11–12), Situation V Opening (§ 13 Opening) (p. 553)]

553

11.    On Wednesday at Matins, after “Glory to the holy and consubstantial Trinity” and “Christ is risen,” etc., as yesterday, and after the Great Litany [Megali Synapti], we sing the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “To all the earth.” Then “Let everything that breathes,” and the 11th Eothinon (Matins) Gospel. Then the “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ” (once) and immediately Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Apostle,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy upon me,” and the Idiomelon “O faithful, let us bless the paramount of the Apostles.” After the Exclamation “Through the mercy,” we sing the Canon of Easter and 4 hymns from the Canon of the Evangelist. At the end of each Ode, we chant the Katavasia, then the “Christ is risen” (3 times), the “Having risen from the grave” and the Petition. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi and the Kontakion of Easter; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Evangelist, the Minologion, then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ” (3 times) and “Having risen from the grave”; then follow the 7th and 8th Odes, then are sung the 9th Ode of Easter with its Megalynaria as well as the 9th Ode of the Evangelist. The Exapostilarion “Through the flesh, having slept as a mortal,” that of the Evangelist and again “Through the flesh, having slept as a mortal.” At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira “We praise Your saving Passion,” 3 of the Evangelist, and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” “Christ is risen (3 times) and the Liturgy begins.
12.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Easter; after the Entrance, “Christ is risen,” the Ypakoi” “They who were with Mary,” the Apolytikion of the Evangelist and the Kontakion “Though You did descend into the grave. Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, we chant “As many as have been baptized”; the Apostolos and the Gospel of the Evangelist. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried out . . . Shine, shine,” Communion Hymn “Body of Christ, “Christ is risen” (3 times) and Dismissal.

SITUATION FIVE

13.    If the Feast of St. John the Evangelist occurs on Thursday of the Ascension, on Wednesday evening after the 9th Hour of Easter, “Blessed is our God” and the Introductory Psalm. At “Lord, I have cried” we sing the Idiomela of the Feast in 6 and of the Evangelist in 4, Glory of the

*(Printed Page 553)*

=== LEAF p569 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation V Concl. (§§ 13 Concl.–15), Situation VI Opening (§ 16 Opening) (p. 554)]

554

Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα, δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ἓν τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

14.    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἡ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν, τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, εἰς τὴν β΄ καὶ γ΄ Στιχολογίαν τὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀνὰ μίαν. Οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἀνέβη ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ἀλαλαγμῷ, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Γ΄ Ἑωθινὸν Εὐαγγέλιον, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Σήμερον ἐν οὐρανοῖς, οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀμφότεροι καὶ ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον, καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Θείῳ καλυφθείς, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ γ΄, Δόξα, Εὐαγγελιστὰ Ἰωάννη, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.
15.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ἀνέβη ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ἀλαλαγμῷ. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Σὲ τὴν ὑπὲρ νοῦν καὶ λόγον, Κοινωνικὸν Ἀνέβη ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ἀλαλαγμῷ, τὸ Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΣΤ΄.

16.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ταῖς μεθεόρτοις ἡμέραις τῆς ἑορτῆς ταύτης ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι

*(Printed Page 554)*

=== LEAF p570 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation V Concl. (§§ 13 Concl.–15), Situation VI Opening (§ 16 Opening) (p. 555)]

555

Evangelist, Now and ever of the Feast. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day, and the Readings: two of the Feast and one of the Evangelist. The Aposticha of the Feast, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Evangelist, and again that of the Feast, and the Dismissal.
14.    On Thursday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Feast and of the Evangelist, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever of the Feast; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. At the First Stasis [Stichologia,] the Kathisma of the Feast (twice), at the 2nd and 3rd Stases [Stichologie] those of the Evangelist and that of the Feast. The Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “God is gone up in a great shout.” Then “Let everything that breathes,” and the 3rd Eothinon (Matins) Gospel. Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ,” Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Apostles,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy upon me,” and the Idiomelon “Today the hosts on high”; both Canons of the Feast and that of the Evangelist. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Evangelist, the Kathisma of the Evangelist and that of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, the Minologion, and the Postscript of the Feast. The Katavasie “Covered by a divine cloud,” then are sung the 9th Ode of the Feast with its Megalynaria and that of the Evangelist. The Exapostilarion of the Feast, that of the Evangelist and again that of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Evangelist, Glory, “O Evangelist John,” Now and ever of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.
15.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast and the Entrance Hymn “God is gone up in a great shout.” After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Evangelist, and the Kontakion of the Feast; the Apostolos of the Evangelist and the Gospel of the Feast. At “Especially,” “You who are above the human mind and speech,” Communion Hymn “God is gone up in a great shout,” the Apolytikion “You ascended in glory,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.

SITUATION SIX

16.    If the Feast of the Evangelist occurs on one of the Post-feast days of the Ascension, his service is sung as prescribed in the Mineon together

*(Printed Page 555)*
