=== LEAF p571 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation VI Concl. (§ 16 Concl.), Situation VII Opening (§§ 17–18 Opening) (p. 556)]

556

διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων· εἰς τὴν θ΄ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἐν δόξῃ ἀναληφθείς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ κτλ.

Ζ΄.

17.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Ἀναλήψεως καταλιμπάνεται, καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ ἀναστάσιμος Ἀκολουθία, ἡ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ ἡ τῶν Πατέρων ὡς ἑξῆς. Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ γ΄ καὶ τῶν Πατέρων δ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα δύο τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ ἓν τῶν Πατέρων. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τῶν Πατέρων τὸ Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

18.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς Κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀποστολικῶν παραδόσεων, τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Πατέρων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα τῆς α΄ Στιχολογίας, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ ἐν τῇ β΄ Στιχολογίᾳ μετὰ τῶν Ἀναστασίμων (ὧν τὸ ἓν προηγεῖται, τὸ δὲ ἕτερον ἕπεται) (ὅρα τὸ Μηναῖον Μαΐου διὰ τὴν ἀκριβῆ σειράν), καὶ ἐν τῇ γ΄ τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε ἱκέτευε τὸν Υἱόν σου· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος Κανών, ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ ὁ τῶν Πατέρων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸ τῶν Πατέρων χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Φωστῆρες ὑπέρλαμπροι· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Θείῳ καλυφθεὶς καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ

*(Printed Page 556)*

=== LEAF p572 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation VI Concl. (§ 16 Concl.), Situation VII Opening (§§ 17–18 Opening) (p. 557)]

557

with the hymns of the Post-feast; at the 9th Ode we sing “More honorable.” At the Entrance, “O come let us worship . . . who ascended in glory,” Apostolos and Gospel of the Evangelist. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” the Apolytikion “You ascended in glory,” etc.

SITUATION SEVEN

17.    If the Feast of Saint John the Evangelist occurs on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, the Service of the Ascension is omitted, and the Services of the Resurrection, of the Evangelist and of the Fathers are sung as follows: On Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 3 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Evangelist and 4 of the Fathers. Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings: two of the Evangelist and one of the Fathers. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever of the Fathers. The Resurrection Apolytikion, the Evangelist’s, the Fathers’, that of the Ascension “You ascended in glory” instead of a Theotokion, and Dismissal.
18.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Liti of the Evangelist, Glory, Now and ever, “Of the apostolic traditions,” and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Fathers and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. At the 1st Stasis [Stichologia], the Kathismata of the Resurrection; at the 2nd Stasis, the Kathisma of the Evangelist with the Kathismata of the Resurrection (of which the one preceeds the other and vice versa) {see the May Mineon for the exact sequence}; and in the 3rd Stasis, that of the of the Evangelist and “O Theotokos Virgin, beseech your Son.” The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi and the Prokimenon, the Canon of the Resurrection, that of the Evangelist and that of the Fathers. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion of the Resurrection and of the Fathers (read), then the Kathisma of the Evangelist and “All-shining luminaries.” After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Evangelist, the Minologion, and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie “Covered by a divine cloud,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel, then we chant “More honorable.” The Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Evan-

*(Printed Page 557)*

=== LEAF p573 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation VII Concl. (§§ 18 Concl.–19), Situation VIII (§ 20); St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation I Opening (§ 1 Opening) (p. 558)]

558

ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ τῶν Πατέρων καὶ τὸ μεθέορτον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ γ΄ καὶ τῶν Πατέρων γ΄. Δόξα, Εὐαγγελιστὰ Ἰωάννη, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
19.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τῶν Πατέρων, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τὴν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Η΄.

20.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης, ἐν ᾗ ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Ἀναλήψεως, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ ψάλλεται ὡς ἐν τῇ ἰδίᾳ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἑορτῆς (§ 13-15), ἐξαιρουμένων τῶν τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀναγνωσμάτων ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, τῆς Λιτῆς τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Ἐν δὲ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐντὸς τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Μυροφόρων μέχρι τῆς Παρασκευῆς τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς Ἀναλήψεως. (Ὅρα ἐν τῷ Ἑορτοδρομίῳ Πίνακι).

Τῇ ΚΑ΄.    Τῶν ἁγίων Βασιλέων καὶ Ἰσαποστόλων Κωνσταντίνου καὶ Ἑλένης.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς ἑβδομάδος τοῦ Παραλύτου, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς

*(Printed Page 558)*

=== LEAF p574 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. John the Apostle and Evangelist (May 8); Situation VII Concl. (§§ 18 Concl.–19), Situation VIII (§ 20); St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation I Opening (§ 1 Opening) (p. 559)]

559

gelist, of the Fathers and of the Post-feast. At the Praises: 2 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Stichira of the Evangelist, and 3 Stichira of the Fathers, Glory, “O Evangelist John,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
19.    In the Liturgy, the Typika, the 4 hymns of the Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Evangelist. The Entrance Hymn “O come let us worship . . . who is risen from the dead”; after the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Evangelist, that of the Fathers, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “When, for us, You had fulfilled Your dispensation”; Apostolos of the Evangelist and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise the Lord,” the Apolytikion “You ascended in glory,” and Dismissal.

SITUATION EIGHT

20.    If the Feast of the Evangelist occurs on Friday of this week, which is the Leave-taking of the Feast of the Ascension, the Service of the Feast together with that of the Evangelist is celebrated as on the day of the Feast (Paragraphs 13 - 15), with the following exceptions: in Vespers there are no Readings of the Feast; in Matins we omit the Liti and Gospel of the Feast. In the Liturgy, Apostolos and Gospel of the Evangelist and Communion Hymn of the Feast.
    Note that the Feast of the Evangelist John may occur in the period of the Pentikostarion from the Sunday of the Myrrhbearers until the Friday of the Leave-taking of the Feast of the Ascension. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

21st - The Holy and Glorious Kings and Equal of the Apostles Constantine and Helen.

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Feast of the Saints occurs on the Saturday of the Week of the Paralytic (i.e. the Saturday after Mid-Pentecost and the day before the

*(Printed Page 559)*

=== LEAF p575 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation I Concl. (§§ 1 Concl.–2), Situation II Opening (§§ 3–4 Opening) (p. 560)]

560

Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, ψάλλεται οὕτως· Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ Στιχηρὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου εἰς ς΄ (δὶς ἕκαστον)· Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου ὡς καὶ τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι τῆς ἑορτῆς, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Στιχηρὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου εἰς δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δοξολογία Μ. τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ἀκολούθως ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Β΄.

3.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, καταλιμπάνεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, ψαλλομένου μόνου τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ καὶ τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, ὡς καὶ μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ ὡς ἑξῆς· Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος β΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Στιχηρὸν καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς Κανὼν καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος Ἀγαλλιάσθω σήμερον φαιδρῶς καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίαν, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῶν Ἀναστασίμων Θεοτοκίων, καὶ τὸ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ

*(Printed Page 560)*

=== LEAF p576 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation I Concl. (§§ 1 Concl.–2), Situation II Opening (§§ 3–4 Opening) (p. 561)]

561

Sunday of the Samaritan Woman), the Service of the Saints is celebrated together with the Post-feast of Mid-Pentecost as follows: In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” the 3 Stichira of the Saints {twice each}; Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast, the Readings of the Saints as well as the Aposticha, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Saints, that of the Feast and Dismissal.
2.    At Matins, the Canon of the Feast and that of the Saints, the Katavasie of the Feast, “More honorable,” the Exapostilarion of the Saints and that of the Feast. At the Praises: the 4 Stichira of the Saint, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saints. Then follows the Liturgy, in which we chant the Antiphons and Entrance Hymn of Easter. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia of the Feast, of the Saints, of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion of the Feast; Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” the Apolytikion “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name of the Lord” and Dismissal.

SITUATION TWO

3.    If the Feast of the Saints* occurs on the Sunday of the Samaritan Woman, the Service of Mid-Pentecost is omitted; only the Apolytikion is sung at Vespers and at Matins, as well as at the Entrance in the Liturgy. The Services are done as follows: On Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Samaritan Woman and 4 of the Saints. Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Samaritan Woman. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings of the Saints. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichiron of the Mode and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Samaritan Woman. Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saints, and of the Feast and Dismissal.
4.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti and the Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Samaritan Woman “Let Heaven and earth radiantly rejoice today” and the “It is meet.” The Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saints and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The First Stasis [Stichologia] and Second Stasis of the Kathismata are done as follows: those of the Resurrection, those of the Saints and the Resurrection Theotokia; and at the Third Stasis that of the Saints with its Theotokion.

*(Printed Page 561)*

=== LEAF p577 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation II Concl. (§§ 4 Concl.–5), Situation III (§ 6), Situation IV (§ 7) (p. 562)]

562

Θεοτοκίου, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα, ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ β΄ Θεοτοκία· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῶν β΄ Θεοτοκίων καὶ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων, Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

5.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα . . . Φωτίζου φωτίζου, Κοινωνικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Εἰ δὲ τύχοι ἐν τῇ Ἀποδόσει τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς τὴν διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Ἁγίου Γεωργίου § 31.

Γ΄.

6.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ, πλὴν Κυριακῆς, μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Πάσχα, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς προλαβούσης Κυριακῆς. Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν.

Δ΄.

7.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ, τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ ἁγίου Ἰωάννου τοῦ Θεολόγου ἐν § 7-9. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, τὰ Καθίσματα, ἐν μὲν τῇ α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίᾳ τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον.

*(Printed Page 562)*

=== LEAF p578 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation II Concl. (§§ 4 Concl.–5), Situation III (§ 6), Situation IV (§ 7) (p. 563)]

563

The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi, and the Prokimenon. The Canon of Pascha, the Canon of the Saints and the two Theotokia. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Samaritan Woman, then the Kathisma of the Saints and that of the Samaritan Woman; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints, the Minologion, and the Postscript of the Samaritan Woman. The Katavasie of Pascha, and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then the 9th Ode of Pascha, then the 9th Ode of the Saints, and the 2 Theotokia with the Megalynaria. The Exapostilaria: of Pascha, of the Saints, and of the Samaritan Woman. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Stichira of the Saints, and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Samaritan Woman, Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
5.    In the Liturgy, we sing the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast, of the Saints, of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion of Easter. Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried out . . . Shine, shine,” Communion Hymn of Easter, the Apolytikion “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.
    If the Feast (May 21) occurs on the Leave-taking of Mid-Pentecost, see the Feast of Saint George, Paragraph 31 for the order of the service.

SITUATION THREE

6.    If the Feast of the Saints [May 21] occurs on any other day of the week except Sunday, until the Leave-taking of Easter, the Service is celebrated as prescribed in the Mineon with the Post-feast hymns of the previous Sunday. Communion Hymn “To all the earth.”

SITUATION FOUR

7.    If the Feast (May 21) occurs on the Sunday of the Blind Man, see the Feast of Saint John the Theologian, Paragraphs 7 - 9 for the order of the Service. At Matins, in the First and Second Stasis [Stichologia], the Kathismata are: the one of the Resurrection, that of the Saints and the Theotokion; at the 3rd Stasis, that of the Saints and the Theotokion.

*(Printed Page 563)*

=== LEAF p579 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation V (§ 8), Situation VI (§ 9), Situation VII (§ 10), Situation VIII Opening (§ 11) (p. 564)]

564

Ε΄.

8.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Πάσχα, τὴν διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Θεολόγου ἐν § 10-12.

ΣΤ΄.

9.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς Ἀναλήψεως, τὴν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Θεολόγου ἐν § 13-15.

Ζ΄.

10.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ταῖς μεθεόρτοις ἡμέραις τῆς ἑορτῆς ταύτης, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων. Εἰς τὴν θ΄ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἐν δόξῃ ἀναληφθείς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, καὶ Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ.

Η΄.

11.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων, (ἡ ἀκολουθία τῆς Ἀναλήψεως καταλιμπάνεται, καὶ ἡ ἀκολουθία ἡ ἀναστάσιμος, τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ τῶν Πατέρων ψάλλονται ὡς ἑξῆς·) τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῶν Πατέρων γ΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄³. Δόξα, Τὰς μυστικὰς σήμερον, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα, δύο τῶν Πατέρων, καὶ ἓν τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Πατέρων, τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς (τῆς Ἀναλήψεως).

3. Τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς (τῆς Ἀναλήψεως) καταλιμπάνονται καὶ ψάλλεται τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον μόνον ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ καὶ τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίου, καὶ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον.

*(Printed Page 564)*

=== LEAF p580 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Constantine and Helen (May 21); Situation V (§ 8), Situation VI (§ 9), Situation VII (§ 10), Situation VIII Opening (§§ 11–12 Opening) (p. 565)]

565

SITUATION FIVE

8.    If the Feast (May 21) occurs on the Wednesday of the Leave-taking of Easter, see the Feast of the Theologian, Paragraphs 10 - 12, for the order of service.

SITUATION SIX

9.    If the Feast (May 21) occurs on the Thursday of Ascension, see the Feast of the Theologian, Paragraphs 13 - 15 for the order of service.

SITUATION SEVEN

10.    If the Feast (May 21) occurs on the days of the Post-feast of the Ascension, the Service is celebrated as prescribed in the Mineon together with the Post-feast hymns. At the 9th Ode we chant “More honorable.” In the Liturgy, at the Entrance “O come let us worship . . . who ascended in glory,” Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints, Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” and the Apolytikion “You ascended in glory.”

SITUATION EIGHT

11.    If the Feast of Saints occurs on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, {the Service of the Ascension is omitted, and the Service of the Resurrection, of the Saints and of the Fathers is sung as follows:} On Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Fathers and 3 of the Saints³. Glory of the Fathers “Let us acclaim today,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings: two of the Fathers and one of the Saints. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Fathers. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, of the Saints and of the Feast [of the Ascension].
12.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Liti

3. The hymns of the Feast [of the Ascension] are omitted, and we chant the Exapostilarion and the Apolytikion, which is chanted in Vespers and Matins instead of the Theotokion.

*(Printed Page 565)*
