=== LEAF p511 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XXIII Concl. (§§ 69–70) and Situation XXIV Opening (§ 71) (p. 496)]

496

ἀμεταβλήτων, ἀνεπάφων καὶ ἀμετακινήτων διαμενόντων διά τε τὸ
πρὸς τοὺς ἀρχαίους Κτήτορας αὐτῶν καὶ Πατέρας σέβας, καὶ διὰ
τὸ διάφορον τοῦ μοναχικοῦ πολιτεύματος καὶ τῆς ὑψηλοτέρας
διαγωγῆς».

    Μετατεθείσης οὖν τῆς ἑορτῆς τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα, ἡ
Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐφεξῆς·
70.    Τῷ Μ. Σαββάτῳ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ Τὰς ἑσπερινὰς ἡμῶν εὐχὰς γ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου
Σήμερον ὁ ᾅδης γ΄, καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Βουλὴν προαιώνιον εἰς δ΄. Δόξα,
Τὴν Σήμερον μυστικῶς, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. Εἴσοδος
μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ εὐθύς, ἄνευ προκειμένου,
τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα.
    α΄. Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐποίησεν ὁ Θεός.
    β΄. τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἐξῆλθεν Ἰακὼβ ἐπὶ τοῦ φρέατος τοῦ ὅρκου.
    γ΄. τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἐγένετο λόγος Κυρίου πρὸς Ἰωνᾶν.
    δ΄ τὸ τελευταῖον τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἔτους ὀκτωκαιδεκάτου
Ναβουχοδονόσορ ὁ Βασιλεύς (τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ Ἀναγνώσματα παραλείπονται
χάριν συντομίας).
    Μετὰ τὴν τοῦ τελευταίου Ἀναγνώσματος συμπλήρωσιν, οἱ
Χοροὶ ἀνιστάμενοι ψάλλουσιν εἰς ἦχον α΄ Τὸν Κύριον ὑμνεῖτε, ἕως
ἂν πληρωθῶσι πάντες οἱ Στίχοι, εἶτα Συναπτὴ μικρά, καὶ ψάλλεται
ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, ὁ Ἀπόστολος
Ἀδελφοὶ ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθημεν· μετὰ τὴν συμπλήρωσιν
τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, εὐθὺς ψάλλεται εἰς ἦχον βαρὺν τὸ Ἀνάστα ὁ Θεὸς
κρίνων τὴν γῆν, ἀρχῆς γινομένης ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως πρὸ τῆς ὡραίας
Πύλης σκορπίζοντος σύναμα καὶ τὰς δάφνας ἐν τῷ Ναῷ, εἶτα τὸ αὐτὸ
καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ μέχρις ἂν πληρωθῶσιν οἱ Στίχοι τοῦ ψαλμοῦ Ὁ Θεὸς ἔστη
ἐν συναγωγῇ, καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ὀψὲ Σαββάτων, καὶ ἀκολούθως
ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου· ἀντὶ τοῦ Οἱ τὰ Χερουβίμ, ψάλλεται
τὸ Τροπάριον Σιγησάτω πᾶσα σὰρξ βροτεία εἰς ἦχον πλάγιον α΄, καὶ
Κοινωνικὸν Ἐξηγέρθη ὡς ὁ ὑπνῶν Κύριος· ἀντὶ τοῦ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς,
Μνήσθητι εὔσπλαγχνε καὶ ἡμῶν (εἰς ἦχον β΄ εἰρμολογικῶς) καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.

71.    Περὶ τὴν δ΄ ὥραν τῆς νυκτός, τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ

*(Printed Page 496)*

=== LEAF p512 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Twenty-Three Concl. (§§ 69–70) and Situation Twenty-Four Opening (§ 71) (p. 497)]

497

the cities and villages. The Typika of the Monasteries remain unchanged,
untouched and unmoved, out of respect for their ancient Founders and
Fathers and because of the different character of the monastic life and its
loftier deportment.”
    The Service of the Feast of the Annunciation having been moved
to the Sunday of Pascha (Easter), is sung as follows:
70.    On Holy Saturday, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have
cried” we chant 3 Resurrection Stichira “Holy Lord, receive our evening
prayers,” 3 Stichira of the Triodion “Today Hades lets out a groan” and the
Feast’s “Revealing the pre-eternal will” in 4. Glory, “The great Moses
prefigured this day mystically,” Now and ever, “The Archangel Gabriel
was sent down from heaven.” Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome
Light,” and immediately without a Prokimenon, the Readings:
    1.) Triodion “In the beginning God created” {Genesis 1:1-13}.
    2.) The Feast’s “Jacob left the town of Beersheba” {Genesis
28:10-17}.
    3.) Triodion “Now, the word of the Lord came to Jonah” {Jonah
Chapters 1 - 4}.
    4.) The last Reading of the Triodion “In the eighteenth year of
King Nebuchadnezzar” {Daniel 3:1-57} (the rest of the
Readings are omitted in order to shorten the service).
    After the last Reading, the Choirs stand and sing in Mode I “Praise
the Lord and exalt Him to all ages,” until all the verses have been sung;
then the Little Litany is recited, and instead of the Trisagios Hymn we sing
“As many of you as have been baptized into Christ.” The Apostolos
“Brethren, do you not know that all of us who have been baptized in
Christ” {Romans 6:3-11}; at the conclusion of the Apostolos we immedi-
ately sing in Mode Varys “Arise, O God, and judge the earth,” begun
before the Beautiful Gate by the Priest, who scatters at the same time bay
leaves throughout the Church; then the Choirs sing this until all the verses
of the Psalm “God has taken His place” {81 (82)} have been completed.
Immediately, the Gospel “Now after the Sabbath” {Matthew 28:1-20} is
recited, and we continue with the Liturgy of Saint Basil. Instead of “We who
mystically represent the Cherubim,” we sing the Troparion “Let all mortal
flesh keep silent” in Mode I Plagal. The Communion Hymn “The Lord is
risen as if from sleep”; instead of “We have seen the [true] Light,” we sing
“Remember us also, compassionate One,” (in Mode II Irmologic) and
Dismissal.
71.    Around the 4th Hour of the night, on the Sunday of Pascha, after

*(Printed Page 497)*

=== LEAF p513 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XXIV Cont. (§ 71) and Opening of § 72 (p. 498)]

498

τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, τὸ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι,
Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄, Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν τρίς, καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα,
καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Μ. Σαββάτου Κύματι θαλάσσης· εἰς
τὴν δ΄ Ὠδὴν λαμβάνει καιρὸν ὁ Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς)
εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Βῆμα, καὶ ἐνδύεται ἅπασαν τὴν Ἀρχιερατικὴν
στολήν, ὡς καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ Ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ Ἱερεῖς, καὶ μετὰ τὴν θ΄
Ὠδὴν τοῦ Κανόνος ἐξέρχονται ἐκ τοῦ Βήματος ψάλλοντες πρῶτον
τὸ Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ χαρὰν μεγάλην ἅπαξ, εἶτα Τὴν Ἀνάστασίν
σου Χριστὲ Σωτήρ, ἐπαναλαμβάνοντες τοῦτο ἕως οὗ φθάσωσιν
εἰς τὴν διωρισμένην ἐξέδραν, καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Διάκονος, Καὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ
καταξιωθῆναι, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται παρὰ τοῦ Πατριάρχου τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον Ὀψὲ Σαββάτων, μέχρι τοῦ κἀκεῖ με ὄψονται· ἐκεῖθεν ὁ
ἀναγινώσκων μεταβαίνει εἰς τὸ Οἱ δὲ ἕνδεκα μαθηταὶ μέχρι τέλους·
εἶτα ἐκφωνεῖ, Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοουσίῳ, καὶ ψάλλει τὸ
Χριστὸς ἀνέστη γ΄, εἶτα καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ καὶ ἐπὶ τέλους τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας, μετὰ δὲ τὴν Συναπτὴν
εἰσερχόμενοι εἰς τὸν Ναὸν ψάλλομεν τὸν Κανόνα τῆς Ἀναστάσεως
εἰς δ΄, καὶ τὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς δ΄· ἐν ἑκάστῃ δὲ Ὠδῇ, ἡ Καταβασία
τοῦ Πάσχα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρίς, τὸ Ἀναστὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς
καὶ ἡ Αἴτησις· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι τὸν ὄρθρον,
καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Πάσχα· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Προκείμενον Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ
ἡμέρας, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς τὸ τῆς
Λειτουργίας, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ ἐκ τρίτου, ὡς εἴθισται καὶ
ἅμα Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος εἰς
ἦχον β΄ Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον
Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, τὸ Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν σου,
τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄, Ἐλέει καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς καὶ ψάλλονται αἱ
λοιπαὶ τῶν Κανόνων Ὠδαὶ μέχρις η΄ Ὠδῆς, εἶτα Τὴν Θεοτόκον καὶ
ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν Κανόνων μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων
αὐτῶν, ἡ Καταβασία Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα . . . Φωτίζου φωτίζου,
τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη κτλ. καὶ ἡ Αἴτησις. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ
Πάσχα Σαρκὶ ὑπνώσας, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀγγελικῶν δυνάμεων
καὶ αὖθις τὸ τοῦ Πάσχα. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῆς
ἑορτῆς δ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερὸν μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτῶν, Δόξα,
Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα —
Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ἐκ τρίτου καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.
72.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα· εἰς τὸ β΄

*(Printed Page 498)*

=== LEAF p514 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Twenty-Four Cont. (§ 71) and Opening of § 72 (p. 499)]

499

“Blessed is our God,” “Glory to You, our God, glory to You,” “Heavenly
King,” the Trisagion, and “Lord, have mercy” (12 times). Glory, Now and
ever, “O come let us worship” (thrice), and Psalm 50 read and the Canon
of Holy Saturday “With the wave of the sea” is sung. At the 4th Ode, the
Patriarch (or the Hierarch) takes Keron {time}, enters into the Vima
(Sanctuary), and vests in full Archieratical vestments, as do the other
Hierarchs and Priests. And after the 9th Ode of the Canon, they exit the
Vima [Sanctuary] singing first “O Earth, announce great joy” (once) then
“Angels sing of Your Resurrection.” They repeat this until they reach the
place from which the Gospel is to be read. And immediately the Deacon:
“That we may be found worthy.” The Patriarch reads the Gospel “Now
after the Sabbath” until “and there they will see me”; then he proceeds to
“Now the eleven disciples” until the end {Matthew 28:1-9, 16-20}. Then
he exclaims “Glory to the Holy Trinity of one essence” and he sings “Christ
is risen” (thrice), and then the Choirs; and then at the end they sing the
Apolytikion “Today marks the crowning of our salvation.” After the Great
Litany, entering the Church, we sing the Canon of the Resurrection (in 4)
and the Canon of the Feast (in 4); at each Ode, the Katavasia of Pascha, then
“Christ is risen (thrice),” “Jesus having risen” and the Petition. After the
3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “They, who were with Miriam,” and the Kontakion
and Ikos of Pascha [Easter]; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of
the Feast, and immediately the Prokimenon “Proclaim from day to day.”
Then “Let everything that has breath” and the Liturgy Gospel of the Feast
{Luke 1:24-38}. Then “Having beheld the resurrection of Christ” (thrice)
as customary and then at once Glory, “Through the intercessions of the
Theotokos,” Now and ever, repeat the same; then in Mode II the Verse
“Proclaim from day to day” and the Idiomelon “Today Gabriel an-
nounces.” “O God, save Your people,” “Lord, have mercy” (twelve times),
“Through the mercy and compassion”; and the rest of the Odes of the
Canon through the 8th Ode are sung. Then “The Theotokos” and the Ninth
Odes of both Canons with their Megalynaria are sung, the Katavasia “The
angel cried out, . . . Shine, shine.” “Christ is risen,” etc. and the Petition.
Exapostilarion of Pascha “Through the flesh having slept as a mortal,”
that of the Feast “A commander of the angelic powers” and again the one
of Pascha. At the Praises: 4 of the Resurrection, 4 of the Feast, then the
Hymns of “A sacred Pascha” with their verses. Glory, “The mystery before
all time,” Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” “Christ is risen”
(thrice), and the Liturgy begins.
72.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of Pascha; at the 2nd Antiphon “Who

*(Printed Page 499)*

=== LEAF p515 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XXIV Concl. (§ 72), Historical Note on 1817 Kyrio-Pascha, and Opening of Situation XXV / XXIV in Text (§ 73) (p. 500)]

500

Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Εὐαγγελίζεσθε
ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν,
τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας,
ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι τὸν ὄρθρον, τὸ Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν
τάφῳ, τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, Ἀπόστολος καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Πάσχα. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα
τῇ κεχαριτωμένῃ . . . Φωτίζου φωτίζου 4, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα
Χριστοῦ. Εἰς τὸ Μετὰ φόβου Θεοῦ (ἀκριβέστερον εἶναι τὸ
Σῶσον, Κύριε), τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη· ἀντὶ τοῦ Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα
Κυρίου τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρὶς χῦμα, ἡ Κατήχησις τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον αὐτοῦ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

    Σημ. Κατὰ τὸ ͵αωιζ΄ ἐπὶ τῶν ἡμερῶν τοῦ ἀοιδίμου Πατριάρχου
Κωνσταντινουπόλεως Κυρίου Κυρίλλου, συνέπεσεν ὁ Εὐαγγελισμὸς
τὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ἐψάλη ἡ Ἀναστάσιμος Ἀκολουθία μετὰ
τὰς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ ἀπαραλλάκτως κατὰ τὴν ἀνωτέρω διατύπωσιν,
ἥτις καὶ ἔκτοτε ἐκανονίσθη.

ΚΔ΄.

73.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου, τῇ Μ.
Κυριακῇ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸ Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοουσίῳ, τὸ
Χριστὸς ἀνέστη μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν Μ. Συναπτήν. Εἰς
τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ Τὸν πρὸ αἰώνων ἐκ πατρὸς
δ΄, καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια δ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ
οὐρανοῦ, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον
Τίς Θεὸς μέγας μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς
ἑορτῆς καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς (ἢ ὁ Ἱερεὺς) Καὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ
Καταξιωθῆναι, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Οὔσης ὀψίας κατὰ
τὸ ἔθος· μετὰ τὸ τέλος ἡ Ἐκτενής, τὸ Καταξίωσον, Πληρώσωμεν τὴν
ἑσπερινήν, Εἴη τὸ κράτος, καὶ ψάλλεται τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπόστιχον Ἡ Ἀνάστασίς σου Χριστὲ Σωτὴρ καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ
Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Σήμερον χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια, Καὶ νῦν,
---
4. Τὸ Τυπικὸν τοῦ Κωνσταντίνου ἐσημείου τὸ Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ... Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ. Ἀλλ᾿ ἡ Ἐπιτροπὴ ἐνέκρινε τὸ τοῦ Πάσχα, διότι αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἑορτὴ τῶν ἑορτῶν καὶ ἡ μεγίστη πανήγυρις τῆς Ἐκκλησίας μετὰ τῆς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ.

*(Printed Page 500)*

=== LEAF p516 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Twenty-Four Concl. (§ 72), Historical Note on 1817 Kyrio-Pascha, and Opening of Situation Twenty-Four [XXV] (§ 73) (p. 501)]

501

is risen from the dead.” The Entrance Hymn “Proclaim from day to
day,” “Save us . . . who is risen from the dead.” The Apolytikion “Christ
is risen,” the Apolytikion “Today marks the crowning of our salvation,”
the Ypakoi “They who were with Miriam,” and the Kontakion “Though
You went down into the tomb.” “As many of you as were baptized into
Christ,” Apostolos and Gospel of Pascha {Acts 1:1-8, John 1:1-17}; at
“Especially,” “The angel cried out to her who is full of grace .
. . Shine, shine,” 4. Communion Hymn “Partake of the Body of
Christ.” At “With the fear of God” {more accurately at “O God, save
Your people”}, we sing “Christ is risen”; instead of “Blessed be the
Name,” we sing “Christ is risen (three times in recitative style); then the
Catechetical Homily of Chrysostom, his Apolytikion, and the Dismissal.
    Note: In 1817 during the Patriarchate of the Patriarch of
Constantinople Cyril, of blessed memory, the Feast of the Annunciation
occurred on the Sunday of Pascha, and the Service of the Resurrection
together with the Service of the Annunciation was celebrated precisely
according to the above order, which has been firmly established since then..

SITUATION TWENTY-FOUR

73.    If the Feast occurs on Monday of Bright Week, on Great Sunday
{i.e. the Sunday of Pascha} at Vespers, after “Glory to the Holy Trinity, one
in essence,” we sing “Christ is risen” with its verses and then the Great
Litany. At “Lord, I have cried” we chant 4 Resurrection Stichira “Come,
let us worship God the Word” and 4 Prosomia of the Feast, Glory, Now and
ever, “The Archangel Gabriel was sent down from heaven.” Entrance
with the Gospel “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon “What God is as
great” with its verses, and the Readings of the Feast, and immediately the
Archpriest {Bishop} (or the Priest) “That we may be found worthy,” and
the Gospel “On the evening” {John 20:19-25} according to custom. At the
end, the Ektenis, the “Lord, grant that,” then “Let us complete our evening
prayer,” “May the might of Your Kingdom.” Then we chant the Resurrec-
tion Apostichon “Your resurrection, Christ Savior,” and the Stichira “A
sacred Pascha,” Glory, “Today is the announcement of joy,” Now and
---
4 The Typikon of Constantine indicates “O Earth, announce . . . As a live ark of God.” But
the [Patriarchal] Committee endorsed the one of Pascha, since Pascha is the Feast of Feasts
and the greatest celebration of the Church together with Feast of the Annunciation.

*(Printed Page 501)*

=== LEAF p517 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XXIV Concl. (§ 73) and Bright Monday Services (§§ 74–76) (p. 502)]

502

᾿Αναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ἐκ δευτέρου, καὶ
τελευταῖον τὸ Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας ἅπαξ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
74.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸ
Δόξα τῇ Ἁγίᾳ καὶ Ὁμοουσίῳ καὶ τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ὡς χθές,
τὴν Μεγάλην Συναπτήν, τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν, καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Προκείμενον
Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον
Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ ἅπαξ, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς
Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ
ἡμέρας, εἰς ἦχον β΄ καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, τὸ
Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τόν λαόν σου, τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄ Ἐλέει καὶ
οἰκτιρμοῖς, καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Ἀναστάσεως καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς,
ὡς ἐσημειώθη ἐν § 71· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ
Πάσχα· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Μηνολόγιον
τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ ὡς σύνηθες ἐκ τρίτου, καὶ
ἀκολούθως τὴν ζ΄ καὶ η΄ Ὠδὴν τῶν Κανόνων, τὴν θ΄, τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια,
ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν § 71. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα Πᾶσα
πνοὴ καὶ πᾶσα Κτίσις εἰς δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄ καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ
Πάσχα ἱερὸν μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτῶν, Δόξα, Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος
μυστήριον, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη
ἐκ γ΄, καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.
75.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ
Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, Σῶσον ἡμᾶς
. . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς
ἑορτῆς, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι τὸν ὄρθρον, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Εἰ
καὶ ἐν τάφῳ, Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ
Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ Θεοῦ κιβωτῷ, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Χριστὸς
ἀνέστη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

76.    Τὸ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ τοῦ
γ΄ ἤχου δ΄, καὶ ς΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ,
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ Οὐρανῷ
καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ (ἐκ τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου). Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ
Ἀναστάσιμον Ὁ τῷ πάθει σου Χριστέ, καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν,
Δόξα, Σήμερον χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ
Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ἐκ δευτέρου, τὸ Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας ἅπαξ,
Ἀπόλυσις καὶ Ἀπόδοσις. Τὸ πρωῒ ἡ ἀναστάσιμος Ἀκολουθία τῆς
ἡμέρας ψάλλεται μόνη, ὥς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ.

*(Printed Page 502)*

=== LEAF p518 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Twenty-Four Concl. (§ 73) and Bright Monday Services (§§ 74–76) (p. 503)]

503

ever, “It is the day of Resurrection.” Then “Christ is risen” (twice), and
“Today marks the crowning of our salvation” (once), and Dismissal.
74.    On Monday of Bright Week at Matins after “Glory to the Holy
Trinity, one in essence,” and “Christ is risen” as yesterday, the Great
Litany, the Exclamation, and immediately the Prokimenon “Proclaim from
day to day.” Then “Let everything that has breath,” and the Gospel “Mary
arose” {Luke 1:39-49, 56}. Then “Having beheld the resurrection of
Christ” (once), Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,”
Now and ever, repeat the same, the Verse “Proclaim from day to day”
(twice) and the Idiomelon “Today Gabriel announces.” Then “O God,
save Your people,” “Lord, have mercy” (twelve times), “Through the
mercy and compassion,” and immediately the Canon of the Resurrection
and of the Feast, as noted in Paragraph 71. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion
and Ikos of Pascha [Easter]; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of
the Feast and the Minologion of the Feast, the “Having beheld the
Resurrection of Christ” (3 times as customary). Following that we chant
the 7th and 8th Odes of the Canons, and the 9th. The Exapostilaria, as
prescribed in Paragraph 71. At the Praises: “All breath and all creation”
in 4, the 4 of the Feast, and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha” with their verses.
Glory, “The mystery before all time,” Now and ever, “It is the day of
Resurrection,” “Christ is risen” (thrice), and the Liturgy begins.
75.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of Pascha; the Entrance Hymn
“Proclaim from day to day,” “Save us . . . who is risen from the dead.” Then
“Christ is risen,” the Apolytikion “Today marks the crowning of our
salvation,” the Ypakoi “They who were with Miriam,” and the Kontakion
“Though You went down into the tomb.” “As many of you as were
baptized into Christ,” Apostolos and Gospel of the Feast {Hebrews 2:11-
18, Luke 1:24-38}. At “Especially,” “O Earth, announce . . . As a live ark
of God,” Communion Hymn of the Feast, “Christ is risen,” and the
Dismissal.
76.    In the evening at “Lord, I have cried” we chant 4 Resurrection
Stichira of Mode III, and 6 of the Feast, Glory, Now and ever, “The
Archangel Gabriel was sent down from heaven.” Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon “Our God in heaven and on earth” {from the
Pentikostarion}. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichiron “O Christ,
the sun was darkened at Your passion” and the Stichira “A sacred
Pascha,” Glory, “Today is the announcement of joy,” Now and ever, “It
is the day of Resurrection.” The Apolytikia “Christ is risen” (twice) and
“Today marks the crowning of our salvation” (once), the Dismissal and the

*(Printed Page 503)*

=== LEAF p519 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: Annunciation Concl. Rubrics and Table Note; Month of April, St. George [April 23], Situation I (§§ 1–2 Opening) (p. 504)]

504

    Ἡ ἐν ταῖς § 73, 74, 75 καὶ 76 διάταξις τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τῆς
ἑορτῆς τηρεῖται καὶ ὅταν ἡ ἑορτὴ τύχῃ τῇ Τρίτῃ ἢ τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς
Διακαινησίμου· ἐξαιρεῖται δὲ μόνον τὸ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τοῦ Πάσχα
ἀναγινωσκόμενον Εὐαγγέλιον.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ δυνατόν νὰ
συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Παρασκευῆς τῆς Γ΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν
Νηστειῶν καὶ ἐντεῦθεν, ἐν δὲ τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ μέχρι τῆς Τετάρτης
τῆς Διακαινησίμου. (Ὅρα τὸν τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακα).

ΜΗΝ ΑΠΡΙΛΙΟΣ

Τῇ ΚΓ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου ἐνδόξου μεγαλομάρτυρος Γεωργίου τοῦ
Τροπαιοφόρου.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.
1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου τῷ Μ. Σαββάτῳ ἢ τῇ Μ. Κυριακῇ
[ἤτοι Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα], ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ μετατίθεται καὶ
ψάλλεται τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου μετὰ τῆς ἀναστασίμου
Ἀκολουθίας ὡς ἑξῆς.
    Τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Πάσχα ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ Τὸν πρὸ αἰώνων ἐκ Πατρὸς
δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια δ΄, Δόξα, Ἀξίως τοῦ ὀνόματος, Καὶ νῦν,
Παρῆλθεν ἡ σκιά, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ
Προκείμενον Τίς Θεὸς μέγας μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον ὡς εἴθισται. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Στιχηρόν, ἀπὸ τοῦ β΄ Χοροῦ Ἡ Ἀνάστασίς σου Χριστὲ Σωτήρ, καὶ
τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Τὸν νοερὸν ἀδάμαντα, Καὶ
νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ἅπαξ, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ αὖθις τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ὡς συνήθως,

*(Printed Page 504)*

=== LEAF p520 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: Annunciation Concl. Rubrics and Table Note; Month of April, St. George [April 23], Situation One (§§ 1–2 Opening) (p. 505)]

505

Leave-taking. In the morning, we celebrate only the Resurrection Service
of the day, as prescribed in the Pentikostarion.
    The order of service for the Feast as prescribed in Paragraphs 73, 74,
75 and 76 is observed even when the Feast occurs on Tuesday or Wednesday
of Bright Week, with the exception of the Gospel read on the Vespers of
Pascha.
    Note that the Feast of the Annunciation may occur in the Triodion
period from Friday of the 3rd Week of Lent and well into the Pentikostarion
period until Wednesday of Bright Week. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

MONTH OF APRIL

23rd - The Holy Glorious Great-martyr George the Trophy-
bearer.

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on Great Saturday or Great Sunday
[i.e. Easter Sunday], his Service is moved to and is sung on the Monday of
Bright Week together with the Resurrection Service as follows:
    On the Sunday of Easter in Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” we
sing the four Resurrection Stichira of Mode II “Him who was born of the
Father before the centuries” and 4 Stichira of the Saint. Glory, “O warrior
George, you have worthily lived up to your name,” Now and ever, “The
dark shadow of the Law has passed away.” Entrance with the Gospel, “O
Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon “What God is great as our God?” with
its verses, and immediately the Gospel as customary. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichiron, by the second Choir “Your Resurrection, Christ
Savior,” and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha”; Glory, “The intellectual
diamond,” Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection.” The Apolytikion
“Christ is risen” once, the Apolytikion of the Saint, and again “Christ is
risen,” and the Dismissal.

2.    On Monday of Bright Week in Matins, as is usual, after the Litany

*(Printed Page 505)*
