=== LEAF p621 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Sunday of the Holy Fathers of the Fourth Ecumenical Council (Chalcedon) (Concl. §§ 1–3); Holy Great-Martyr Marina (July 17, Heading, § 1, § 2 Opening) (p. 606)]

606

εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ἓξ καὶ τῶν Πατέρων
δ΄. Δόξα, Τὰς μυστικὰς σήμερον, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ
ἤχου· Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα·
Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά· Δόξα, τῶν Πατέρων, Καὶ
νῦν, Ἀσπόρως ἐκ θείου Πνεύματος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον,
τὸ τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Πατέρων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον, καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος,
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή,
οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος
καὶ ὁ τῶν Πατέρων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον καὶ
ὁ Οἶκος, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Φωστῆρες ὑπέρλαμπροι καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον·
ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας
καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῶν Πατέρων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα
μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν
Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Πατέρων
καὶ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Πατέρων δ΄.
Δόξα, Τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων ὁ Χορός, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη,
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Πατέρων. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Πατέρων, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Πατέρων. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν.
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙΖ΄.    Τῆς Ἁγίας μεγαλομάρτυρος Μαρίνης.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῆς Μάρτυρος ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ, πλὴν
Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν·
εἰς τὸ Δόξα τῶν Ἀποστίχων, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος
. . . μετὰ τῆς ἀθληφόρου.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων, συμψάλλεται καὶ
ἡ τῆς Ἁγίας Ἀκολουθία οὕτω· τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῶν Πατέρων γ΄, καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας γ΄. Εἰς

*(Printed Page 606)*

=== LEAF p622 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Sunday of the Holy Fathers of the Fourth Ecumenical Council (Chalcedon) (Concl. §§ 1–3); Holy Great-Martyr Marina (July 17, Heading, § 1, § 2 Opening) (p. 607)]

607

the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection,
and 4 of the Fathers, Glory, “Let us extol today those mystical trumpets,”
Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrec-
tion Stichira, Glory of the Fathers, Now and ever, “Without seed, by the
divine Spirit.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, the
Theotokion and Dismissal.
2.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Fathers and
the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia, as in Vespers, then
the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon.
The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Fathers. After the 3rd Ode, the
Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos read, then the Kathisma of the Fathers
“Greatly shining luminaries,” and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Fathers, the Minologion of the day and the
Postscript of the Fathers. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the
entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.”
Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers and the Theotokion. At
the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Fathers, Glory, “The
chorus of the Holy Fathers,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great
Doxology and “Today salvation.”
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Fathers. After the Entrance,
the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Fathers, that of the Saint of the
Church, and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians.” Apostolos and
Gospel of the Fathers. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn
“Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 17th    The Holy Great Martyr Marina.

1.    If the commemoration of the Martyr occurs on any day except
Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon. At the
Glory of the Aposticha, Now and ever, “O Theotokos, you are the [true]
vine . . . with the Champion.”
2.    If the Feast falls on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, the Service of
the Martyr is also chanted as follows: on Saturday at “Lord, I have cried”
we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Fathers, and 3 of the Saint.

*(Printed Page 607)*

=== LEAF p623 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Holy Great-Martyr Marina (July 17, Concl. § 2); Holy Prophet Elias the Thesbite (July 20, Heading, §§ 1–2, § 3 Opening) (p. 608)]

608

τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Πατέρων,
Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Πατέρων, τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ
θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Τριαδικὸν κανόνα, ψάλλεται
καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς Ἁγίας. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια
ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Καθίσματα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, τῶν Πατέρων
καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
Ἀναστάσιμα, εἶτα Κάθισμα τῶν Πατέρων, τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ
Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Πατέρων, Ἐξαποστειλάρια,
τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Πατέρων, τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς
τὴν Λειτουργίαν, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ
Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Πατέρων, τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ,
Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Πατέρων καὶ Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε.

Τῇ Κ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου προφήτου Ἠλιοὺ τοῦ Θεσβίτου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Προφήτου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν
Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
Μετὰ τὸ Δόξα τῶν Ἀποστίχων, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος
ἡ ἀληθινή . . . μετὰ τοῦ Προφήτου κτλ.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Προφήτου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Προφήτου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄
Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα,
τοῦ Προφήτου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προφήτου, Θεοτοκίον Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος
ἀπόκρυφον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
Κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Προφήτου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ
Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, εἶτα τὸ τῆς γ΄
Στιχολογίας Κάθισμα τοῦ Προφήτου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου {τὸ
Μηναῖον δὲν ἔχει Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν}, τὰ
Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ β΄ τοῦ Προφήτου· ἀπὸ

*(Printed Page 608)*

=== LEAF p624 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Holy Great-Martyr Marina (July 17, Concl. § 2); Holy Prophet Elias the Thesbite (July 20, Heading, §§ 1–2, § 3 Opening) (p. 609)]

609

At the Aposticha: Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Fathers. The
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, of the Saint, and the
Theotokion. On Sunday at Matins, after the Triadic Canon, we sing the Liti
of the Saint. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia, as in Vespers, then the
Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata, the Evlogitaria, the
Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of
the Resurrection, that of the Fathers, and that of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode,
the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos, then the Kathisma of the Fathers, that
of the Saint, and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos
of the Fathers. Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, of the
Saint and the Theotokion. In the Liturgy, after the Entrance, the Apolytikia:
of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, of the Saint, of the Saint of the Church;
Apostolos and Gospel of the Fathers and Communion Hymn “Praise [the
Lord].”

The 20th    The Holy Prophet Elias the Thesbite.

1.    If the commemoration of the Prophet occurs on any day except
Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon. At the
Glory of the Aposticha, Now and ever, “O Theotokos, you are the [true]
vine . . . with the Prophet etc.”
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection and 4 of the Prophet. Glory of the
Prophet, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O
Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Prophet, Now and ever, “My creator
and savior.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Prophet, and the
Theotokion “The mystery hidden before all time,” and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Prophet and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion
and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers;
then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order,
then the Kathisma of the Prophet of the 3rd Stasis with the Theotokion.
{The Mineon does not have any Kathismata of the 3rd Stasis.} The
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon.
The Canons of the Resurrection and the 2nd of the Prophet. After the 3rd
Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Prophet, the Kathisma of the Prophet

*(Printed Page 609)*

=== LEAF p625 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Holy Prophet Elias the Thesbite (July 20, Concl. § 3 Concl., § 4); Dormition of Saint Anna, Mother of the Theotokos (July 25, Heading, §§ 1–2, § 3 Opening) (p. 610)]

610

γ΄ Ὠδῆς, μετὰ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸν Οἶκον τοῦ Προφήτου, τὸ
Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ
Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ
στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον,
τοῦ Προφήτου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προφήτου δ΄, Δόξα, τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος τοῦ Προφήτου δ΄. Μετὰ
τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προφήτου, καὶ τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος
τοῦ Προφήτου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως,
Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΚΕ΄    Ἡ Κοίμησις τῆς ἁγίας Ἄννης, μητρὸς
τῆς Θεοτόκου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῆς Ἁγίας ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν
Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄
Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, Τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Δεῦτε πᾶσα ἡ κτίσις, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς
Ἁγίας καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ
Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς , καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας
ἅπαξ· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν
Καθίσματα, Ἀναστάσιμα δύο καὶ ἓν τῆς Ἁγίας· εἰς τὴν β΄ ὡσαύτως·
εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἁγίας· ἀπὸ
γ΄ Ὠδῆς, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς Ἁγίας, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα ἅπαξ·
ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον,
αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ

*(Printed Page 610)*

=== LEAF p626 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Holy Prophet Elias the Thesbite (July 20, Concl. § 3 Concl., § 4); Dormition of Saint Anna, Mother of the Theotokos (July 25, Heading, §§ 1–2, § 3 Opening) (p. 611)]

611

and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the
Resurrection and the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth”
and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honor-
able.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Prophet and the Theotokion.
At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Prophet, Glory the
Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today
salvation.”
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the 2nd Canon of the Prophet. After the
Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Prophet, of the Saint
of the Church and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians.” Apostolos
of the Prophet and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,”
Communion Hymn “Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light,”
and Dismissal.

The 25th    The Dormition of the Holy Anna, Mother of
the Theotokos.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except
Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint,
Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode, Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resur-
rection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “Come, all creation.” The Apolytikia:
of the Resurrection, of the Saint, and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Saint, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion
of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia of
the Resurrection (twice), and of the Saint (once) then the Psalter and the
Amomos. At the Kathismata, 2 of the Resurrection and one of the Saint; the
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon.
The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, then the Kathisma (once); after the 6th
Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The
Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning
Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrec-
tion and of the Saint. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the

*(Printed Page 611)*

=== LEAF p627 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Dormition of Saint Anna (July 25, Concl. § 3 Concl., § 4); Holy Hieromartyr Ermolaos and Holy Righteous Martyr Paraskevi (July 26, Heading, §§ 1–3); Holy Great-Martyr and Healer Panteleimon (July 27, Heading, § 1 Opening) (p. 612)]

612

Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας. Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄, Δόξα τὸ
Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ
Σήμερον σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ἁγίας. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον τῆς Ἁγίας Προγόνων Χριστοῦ, Ἀπόστολος τῆς
Ἁγίας, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Κς΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἱερομάρτυρος Ἑρμολάου καὶ τῆς
ἁγίας Ὁσιομάρτυρος Παρασκευῆς.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς,
ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Ἁγίας μετὰ τῆς τοῦ ἁγίου Ἑρμολάου, ψάλλεται
κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄
Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς
τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῆς
Ἁγίας, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

    Ἡ δὲ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἑρμολάου ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις
ἐκτὸς ἐάν που ἑορτάζηται ἐπισήμως.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ἅπασα ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς
ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τῆς ἁγίας Κυριακῆς (ὅρα Ἰουλ. Ζ΄ § 3,4). Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄, Ἀπόστολος τῆς Ἁγίας
καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, κτλ.

Τῇ ΚΖ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Μεγαλομάρτυρος καὶ Ἰαματικοῦ
Παντελεήμονος.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία
ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν. Μετὰ τὸ Δοξαστικὸν

*(Printed Page 612)*

=== LEAF p628 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Dormition of Saint Anna (July 25, Concl. § 3 Concl., § 4); Holy Hieromartyr Ermolaos and Holy Righteous Martyr Paraskevi (July 26, Heading, §§ 1–3); Holy Great-Martyr and Healer Panteleimon (July 27, Heading, § 1 Opening) (p. 613)]

613

Saint, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology
and “Today salvation.”
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, of the Saint of the Church, and
the Kontakion “Of the ancestors of Christ.” Apostolos of the Saint and
Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn
“Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 26th    The Holy Ieromartyr Ermolaos and the Holy Righ-
teous Martyr Paraskevi.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except
Sunday, her Service, together with that of the Saint Ermolaos, is sung
according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint,
Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira,
Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “My creator and savior.” The Apolytikia:
of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.

    The Service of Saint Ermolaos is sung at Compline except where
the church in which the service is celebrated is named after the Saint.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, the entire Service is celebrated as on the Feast
of Saint Kyriaki (see July 7, Paragraphs 3 and 4). At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint. Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel
of the Sunday. “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise [the Lord],” etc.

The 27th    The Holy Great Martyr and Healer Panteleimon
the Physician.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except
Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon. After the

*(Printed Page 613)*

=== LEAF p629 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Holy Great-Martyr and Healer Panteleimon (July 27, Concl. § 1 Concl., §§ 2–4); Forefeast Rubric for July 31 on Sunday (Procession of the Honorable Cross) (p. 614)]

614

τῶν Ἀποστίχων, Καὶ νῦν, Δέσποινα πρόσδεξαι. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον,
Καταβασίαι Χοροὶ Ἰσραήλ, καὶ Κοντάκιον εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν
Ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους μετεμορφώθης, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄
Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα
τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον,
τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ
Τριαδικὸς Κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν
Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ τὸ τελευταῖον τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ
Θεοτοκίου, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ
τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ
γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου· εἶτα Κάθισμα τοῦ αὐτοῦ
καὶ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ
τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χοροὶ Ἰσραήλ, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις
τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς
τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα, τὸ Ἑωθινόν,
Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον
σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους μετεμορφώθης, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ
Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς καὶ Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε.

    Ἐὰν ἡ ΛΑ΄ Ἰουλίου τύχῃ ἐν Κυριακῇ, ἡ Προεόρτιος τῆς
Προόδου τοῦ Σταυροῦ Ἀκολουθία καταλιμπάνεται, μὴ ὑπάρχοντος
ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ Κανόνος προεορτίου, καὶ τοῦτο ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς Ναοῖς
τῶν πόλεων. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἱεραῖς Μοναῖς ἐξακολουθήτωσαν αἱ
Τυπικαὶ αὐτῶν ἀρχαῖαι διατάξεις.

*(Printed Page 614)*

=== LEAF p630 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Holy Great-Martyr and Healer Panteleimon (July 27, Concl. § 1 Concl., §§ 2–4); Forefeast Rubric for July 31 on Sunday (Procession of the Honorable Cross) (p. 615)]

615

Glory of the Aposticha, Now and ever, “Lady, accept.” In Matins, the
Katavasie “The choruses of Israel,” and Kontakion in the Liturgy “You
were transfigured upon the mountain,” Communion Hymn “In eternal
memorial.”
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint,
Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrec-
tion Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “Unwedded Virgin.” The
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Saint, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion
of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord” the Apolytikia as
in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata
in order, and the last Kathisma of the Saint with the Theotokion, the
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon.
The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, then the Kathisma of the Saint and the
Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection,
and the Minologion of the Saint. The Katavasie “The choruses of Israel,”
and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honor-
able.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion.
At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint, Glory the
Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today
salvation.”

4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, of the Saint of the Church, and
the Kontakion “You were transfigured upon the mountain.” Apostolos of
the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday, and Communion Hymn “Praise [the
Lord].”
    If July 31 falls on a Sunday, the Service of the Pre-feast of the
Procession of the Holy Cross is omitted, since there in no Canon of the Pre-
feast in Matins, and this situation occurs in the holy Churches of the cities.
The Monasteries, on the other hand, must follow their ancient Typikal
orders of service.

*(Printed Page 615)*
