=== LEAF p371 ===
[Original Greek Text: Concurrence of St. John Chrysostom; St. Basil the Great, St. Gregory the Theologian and St. John Chrysostom (The Three Hierarchs) (§ 1 – § 3) (p. 356)]

356

μέχρι τῆς Τρίτης τῆς Τυρινῆς (Ὅρα τὸν τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακα).

Τῇ Λ΄.        Τῶν τριῶν Ἱεραρχῶν Βασιλείου τοῦ Μ., Γρηγορίου τοῦ Θεολόγου καὶ Ἰωάννου τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ ς΄ τῶν Ἁγίων Προσόμοια, Δόξα, Τὰς μυστικὰς σήμερον, Καὶ νῦν, Τίς μὴ μακαρίσει σε, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια, Δόξα, Σαλπίσωμεν ἐν σάλπιγγι, Καὶ νῦν, Μακαρίζομέν σε, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Τοὺς τρεῖς μεγίστους φωστῆρας, Θεοτοκίον Τοῦ Γαβριὴλ φθεγξαμένου σοι καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τῶν Ἁγίων, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ β΄ Ἀπολυτίκια, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Οἱ Ἱερεῖς σου, Κύριε, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ Ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν Διδασκάλων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἐξεχύθη ἡ χάρις ἐν χείλεσιν ἡμῶν, Κανόνες ὁ τῆς Θεοτόκου Δεῦτε λαοὶ καὶ οἱ τῶν Ἁγίων, ἀνὰ δ΄· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν εἰς ἦχον β΄ καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα τὸν Κανόνα τῆς Θεοτόκου σὺν τῷ Εἱρμῷ Τὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ Θεὸν λόγον, λέγοντες εἰς τὰ λοιπὰ τρία Στίχον Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε, εἶτα τοὺς τῶν Ἁγίων δύο Κανόνας μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων. Τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια κατὰ σειράν. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄ Προσόμοια, Δόξα, Σήμερον αἱ ψυχαὶ τῶν γηγενῶν, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον ὁ Χριστὸς ἐν τῷ Ναῷ. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὡς τῶν Ἀποστόλων ὁμότροποι.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ α΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ τοῦ β΄ κανόνος τῶν Ἁγίων. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Τοὺς Τρεῖς μεγίστους φωστῆρας, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν· ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ἁγίων. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 356)*

=== LEAF p372 ===
[English Facing Translation: Concurrence of St. John Chrysostom; The Three Hierarchs: Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian and John Chrysostom (§ 1 – § 3) (p. 357)]

357

Cheesefare. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

The 30th.    The Three Hierarchs Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian and John Chrysostom.

1.    In Vespers following the Introductory Psalm and the First Stasis of the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing the 6 Prosomia of the Saints, Glory, "Let us extol today those mystical trumpets," Now and ever, "Who does not call you blessed." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Prosomia, Glory, "Let us blow the trumpet of songs," Now and ever, "We bless you." The Apolytikion "The three great luminaries," Theotokion "At the sound of Gabriel's voice," and Dismissal.

2.    In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saints, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saints and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the two Apolytikia and the Theotokion, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV, and the Prokimenon "Your Priests, O Lord." Then "Let everything that has breath" and the Gospel. Then Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "By the intercessions of the Teachers," Now and ever, "By the intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "Have mercy upon me, O God" and the Idiomelon "Grace poured upon our lips." Canons of the Theotokos "Come, all you people" and of the Saints with four hymns. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saints and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints and the Minologion. The Katavasie "The sun once shone," then we sing "More honorable" in Mode II and, after that, the Canon of the Theotokos with the Irmos "The Word of God from God," saying at each of the following three hymns, the Verse "Most holy Theotokos, intercede for us." Then the two Canons of the Saints with their Megalynaria. The Exapostilaria in order. At the Praises: the 4 Prosomia, Glory, "Today the souls of the earthly," Now and ever, "Today Christ is presented in the Temple," Great Doxology, the Apolytikion "Being like the Apostles," and Dismissal.

3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and Beatitudes, and hymns from the 3rd Ode of the First Canon and the 6th Ode of the Second Canon of the Saints. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion "The three great luminaries," that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "You who have sanctified by Your birth a virgin womb." Apostolos and Gospel of the Saints. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Their sound has gone forth into all the earth," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 357)*

=== LEAF p373 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Three Hierarchs (§ 4 – § 6 incipit) (p. 358)]

358

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ (ἐκτὸς τοῦ Τριῳδίου), τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας ὅρα εἰς τὴν μνήμην τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου ἐν § 2, 3, 4· ἀλλ’ ἐν μὲν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, ψάλλονται Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων ς΄. [Δόξα,] Καὶ νῦν τῶν Ἀποστίχων Ναὸς καὶ πύλη ὑπάρχεις. Ἐν δὲ τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, εἰς τὰς δύο πρώτας Στιχολογίας ψάλλομεν μετὰ τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κάθισμα τὸ τῶν Ἁγίων μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου, καὶ εἰς τὴν γ΄ τὰ τῶν Ἁγίων μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· μετὰ δὲ τὰς καταβασίας πρῶτον ψάλλομεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν ⁴ εἰς Ἦχον β΄, εἶτα τὸν Εἱρμὸν μετὰ τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Θεοτόκου, καὶ τοῦ κανόνος τῶν Ἁγίων μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων. [Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν,] Ἀπόστολος τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς,* Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν καὶ τὰ ἑξῆς.

5.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ Τριῳδίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄ (ἐν δὲ τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων γ΄), Δόξα, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῶν Ἁγίων. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου, εἶτα τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

6.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου (ἐὰν ὑπάρχῃ), εἰ δὲ μή, Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὡς τῶν Ἀποστόλων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Τὰ Καθίσματα ὡς ἀνωτέρω ἐν § 4, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ εἷς τῶν Ἁγίων, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα ψάλλεται τὸ Κάθισμα τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον

4. Ἐπειδὴ ἕπεται Κανὼν τῆς Θεοτόκου, ἂν θέλῃ ὁ Προεστὼς δύναται παραλείψαι Τὴν τιμιωτέραν καὶ μάλιστα διότι πανταχοῦ σχεδὸν ἀγομένης ἐπισήμως πανηγύρεως σήμερον, ἐκφωνεῖται λόγος πανηγυρικός.
* {Πιθανὸν λάθος. Ὅρα Προθεωρία σελ. 36, §42· «τῶν τριῶν Ἱεραρχῶν (ὅταν ἡ ἑορτὴ αὐτῶν μὴ συμπίπτῃ ἐντὸς τοῦ Τριῳδίου) Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται, καὶ ἐν Κυριακῇ ἔτι, τῶν Ἁγίων.»}

*(Printed Page 358)*

=== LEAF p374 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Three Hierarchs (§ 4 – § 6 incipit) (p. 359)]

359

4.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on a Sunday {outside the Triodion period}, the Service is sung according to the order of the service of Saint Gregory, Paragraphs 2, 3, 4; but in Vespers, 4 Resurrection Stichira are sung and 6 of the Saints. [Glory] Now and ever of the Aposticha: "You are the Temple and the Gate." At Matins, at the first two Stasis [Stichologie] of the Kathismata we sing after the Resurrection Kathisma that of the Saints with the Theotokion; at the 3rd Stasis, the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion; after the Katavasies, we sing first "More honorable"⁴ in Mode II, then the Irmos with the Canon of the Theotokos, and the Canon of the Saints with the Megalynaria. [In the Liturgy,] Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday.* Communion Hymn "Their sound has gone forth into all the earth," and the rest.

5.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on a Sunday within the Triodion period, in Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 2 of the Triodion and 4 of the Saints (on the Sunday of Meatfare: 4 of the Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Saints). Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Saints. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Triodion. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saints, the Theotokion and Dismissal.

6.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Saints, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Triodion (if there is one); if not, Now and ever the Theotokion, and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Being like the Apostles," and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata as in Paragraph 4 above, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and one of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the Saints and that of the Triodion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, and the Minologion of the Saints of the day, and the Postscript of

4. Since a Canon of the Theotokos is recited here, the officiating clergyman, if he so wishes, may omit "More honorable," and certainly because, this occasion being a great Feast, almost everywhere a panegyric sermon is exclaimed.
* {Possible error. See Protheoria, page 36, Paragraph 42: "the three Hierarchs (when their Feast does not occur within the Triodion period) the Apostolos and Gospel selections, even on a Sunday, are those of the Saints."}

*(Printed Page 359)*

=== LEAF p375 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Three Hierarchs (§ 6 concl. – § 8; Notes); Month of February: St. Tryphon and Pre-feast of the Presentation (§ 1 incipit) (p. 360)]

360

τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν εἰς ἦχον β΄ καὶ ἀκολούθως ψάλλομεν τοὺς τρεῖς Κανόνας τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς, ὡς ἐσημειώθη ἀνωτέρω ἐν § 2· ἡ Καταβασία Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπίς. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων γ΄, Δόξα, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

7.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν. Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

8.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Ἁγίων μετατίθεται καὶ ψάλλεται τῇ ΚΘ΄ τοῦ μηνός, κατὰ τὴν ἐν § 1, 2, 3 διατύπωσιν, ἡ δὲ τῶν Ψυχῶν ψάλλεται τὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ Σαββάτου μὴ μετατιθεμένη διὰ τὸ πένθιμον.

    Σημ. Τῷ ,αωπβ [1882] συνέπεσεν ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν καὶ ἐψάλη, Συνοδικῇ ἀποφάσει, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω καὶ ἔκτοτε ἐκανονίσθη οὕτω.

    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου μέχρι τῆς Παρασκευῆς τῆς Τυρινῆς ἑβδομάδος. (Ὅρα τὸν τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακα).

❦

ΜΗΝ ΦΕΒΡΟΥΑΡΙΟΣ

Τῇ Α΄.        Τοῦ ἁγίου Μάρτυρος Τρύφωνος, καὶ τὰ Προεόρτια τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Α΄ Φεβρουαρίου ἐν οἱᾳδήποτε ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου Τρύφωνος καὶ τὰ Προεόρτια

*(Printed Page 360)*

=== LEAF p376 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Three Hierarchs (§ 6 concl. – § 8; Notes); Month of February: St. Tryphon and Pre-feast of the Presentation (§ 1 incipit) (p. 361)]

361

the Sunday. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the entire order of the Morning Gospel of Matins of the Triodion. Then we sing "More honorable" in Mode II, then the three Canons of the 9th Ode, as noted above in Paragraph 2; the Katavasia "Theotokos, the Hope [... In the shadow]." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Saints. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Triodion and 3 of the Saints. Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

7.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Second Canon of the Saints. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, that of the Saints and that of the Saint of the Church, Kontakion "You who have sanctified by Your birth a virgin womb." Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "In all the earth," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

8.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on the Saturday of the Souls, the Service of the Saints is sung in advance {on Friday}, the 29th of the month, according to the order outlined in Paragraphs 1, 2, and 3; the Service of the Souls, on the other hand, is not moved to another day but is sung on Saturday. because of its mournful character.
    Note: In 1882, the Feast of the Three Hierarchs fell on the Saturday of the Souls; consequently, the Service of the Three Hierarchs was sung, by Synodal decision, on the Sunday of Meatfare, and has been done in the same manner since that time.
    It is noteworthy that the Feast of the Saints, if it falls within the period of the Triodion, may occur from the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee until the Friday of Cheesefare week. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

❦

MONTH OF FEBRUARY

The 1st.    The Holy Martyr Tryphon, and the Pre-feast of the Presentation of our Lord Jesus Christ

1.    If February 1 occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service of Saint Tryphon and of the Pre-feast is sung according to the order of the Mineon.

*(Printed Page 361)*

=== LEAF p377 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. Tryphon and Pre-feast of the Presentation (§ 1 concl. – § 5 incipit) (p. 362)]

362

ψάλλονται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.

2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, Προεόρτια γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄, Δόξα Προεόρτιον, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν Προεόρτιον Τὸν ἱερὸν ἡ ἱερὰ Παρθένος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Οὐράνιος χορὸς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Καθίσματα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος οὗ ὁ Στίχος Δόξα σοι, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον. Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ δ΄ Προεόρτια. Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, Σήμερον σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε [τὸν Κύριον] κτλ.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, [μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα] ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ Προεόρτια γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. [Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.] Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὴν συνήθη τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς Κυριακῆς διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας, ὁ ἀναστάσιμος Κανών, ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ...

*(Printed Page 362)*

=== LEAF p378 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. Tryphon and Pre-feast of the Presentation (§ 1 concl. – § 5 incipit) (p. 363)]

363

2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Pre-feast and 3 of the Saint. Glory of the Pre-feast, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Pre-feast. "The Temple the holy Virgin." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and of the Pre-feast "The Chorus of angels," and Dismissal.

3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Ypakoi of the Mode and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Pre-feast with the Verse "Glory to You, our God, glory to You." After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint and of the Pre-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Saint. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and of the Pre-feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Pre-feast, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed." Great Doxology, "Today salvation." Then follows the Liturgy, the Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday, Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

4.    If the Feast occurs on the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee, in Vespers [on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at "Lord, I have cried,"] we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion, 3 of the Pre-feast, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. [Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Prokimenon.] At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Triodion. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, of the Pre-feast and Dismissal.

5.    On Sunday at Matins, after the usual order of the Sunday Matins, the Canons of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Pre-feast; after the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Triodion, of the Saint and of the Pre-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Saint. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the entire order of the Morning Gospel of the Triodion; then we sing "More honorable."

*(Printed Page 363)*

=== LEAF p379 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. Tryphon and Pre-feast (§ 5 concl.); February 2: The Presentation (Meeting) of Christ (Case I, § 1 – § 2 incipit; Ode 9 incipit) (p. 364)]

364

Εὐαγγελίου. Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ Προεόρτια γ΄. Δόξα, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, Σήμερον σωτηρία καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται οἱ Μακαρισμοί. Ἀπολυτίκια μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ Προεόρτιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν *, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Τριῳδίου· Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε [τὸν Κύριον] καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Β΄.        Ἡ Ὑπαπαντὴ τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ Α΄.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Μεγάλῳ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Λέγε Συμεὼν εἰς ἕξ. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνοιγέσθω ἡ πύλη. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Κατακόσμησον τὸν Νυμφῶνα σου Σιών, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ τοῖς Χερουβὶμ ἐποχούμενος. Νῦν Ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Χαῖρε Κεχαριτωμένη ἐκ τρίτου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις Ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ δικαίου Συμεὼν βασταχθῆναι καταδεξάμενος διὰ τὴν ἡμῶν σωτηρίαν, Χριστὸς ὁ ἀληθινὸς Θεὸς ἡμῶν κτλ.

2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ψάλλεται ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος· εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ γ΄, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία μου· τὰ Καθίσματα ἐκ δευτέρου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός σου, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἀνοιγέσθω ἡ Πύλη, ὁ Κανὼν εἰς ς΄ ἄνευ Στίχων, μόνον Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα ἅπαξ, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον Ἀβυσσοτόκον καὶ ψάλλονται τὰ Μεγαλυνάρια.

[Ὠδὴ Θ]
Ἀκατάληπτόν ἐστι, τὸ τελούμενον ἐν σοί, καὶ

*(Printed Page 364)*

=== LEAF p380 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. Tryphon and Pre-feast (§ 5 concl.); February 2: Feast of the Presentation of our Lord Jesus Christ (Case I, § 1 – § 2 incipit; Ode 9 incipit) (p. 365)]

365

Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, of the Saint and the Pre-feast. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Triodion and 3 of the Pre-feast, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation." Then follows the Liturgy, in which are chanted the Beatitudes. Apolytikia after the Entrance: of the Resurrection, the Pre-feast, the Saint, the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "You who have sanctified, by Your birth, a virgin womb."* Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Triodion, Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We have seen the [True] light," and Dismissal.

The 2nd.    Feast of the Presentation of our Lord, God and Saviour Jesus Christ to the Temple.

SITUATION ONE

1.    In Great Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at "Lord, I have cried," we sing the 3 Idiomela "Symeon, tell us," (twice each) Glory, Now and ever, "Let the gate of heaven be opened." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon, and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Idiomela "Adorn Your bridal chamber, O Zion," Glory, Now and ever, "He who is borne on high by the Cherubim"; then "Lord, now let" and the Trisagion. The Apolytikion "Hail, O Theotokos Virgin full of grace" three times, and the Dismissal: "May He who for our salvation were carried in the arms of Symeon the Just, Christ our true God," etc.

2.    In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti is sung; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion three times, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos "My heart is overflowing with a good theme" (Psalm 44). The Kathismata twice each, the Anavathmi of the first Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon "I will remember Your name" (Psalm 44:17). Then "Let all breath" and the Gospel, Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," Now and ever the same, the Verse "Have mercy upon me" and the Idiomelon "Let the gate of heaven be opened"; the Canon with six hymns without a Stichos [Verse], except Glory, Now and ever in each Ode; after the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma once, after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the following Megalynaria are sung:

[Canticle Nine]
That which is fulfilled in you is beyond the understanding of

*(Printed Page 365)*
