=== LEAF p131 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Daily Service — Midnight Office Dismissal, Litany for Peace, Matins Enarxis, Royal Beginning, Six Psalms, Daily Canons (p. 116)]

116

Ἐπάκουσον ἡμῶν ὁ Θεὸς ὁ Σωτὴρ ἡμῶν ἡ ἐλπὶς πάντων τῶν περάτων τῆς γῆς κτλ. ὅτι ἐλεήμων καὶ φιλάνθρωπος θεὸς ὑπάρχεις, καὶ σοὶ τὴν δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ τῷ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεί, καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, Ἀμήν. Εἶτα στραφεὶς πρὸς τὸν λαὸν ποιεῖ τὴν Ἀπόλυσιν Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡ ἐλπὶς ἡμῶν, δόξα σοι· Χριστὸς ὁ ἀληθινὸς θεὸς ἡμῶν, ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Παναχράντου αὐτοῦ Μητρός, τῶν ἁγίων ἐνδόξων καὶ πανευφήμων Ἀποστόλων καὶ πάντων τῶν Ἁγίων ἐλεήσαι καὶ σώσαι ἡμᾶς ὡς ἀγαθὸς καὶ φιλάνθρωπος· καὶ κατελθὼν μίαν βαθμίδα τοῦ βήματος ἐξακολουθεῖ, Εὐξώμεθα ὑπὲρ εἰρήνης τοῦ κόσμου· καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον συνεχῶς· Ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων Χριστιανῶν, ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν καὶ καθεξῆς, εἴπωμεν καὶ ὑπὲρ ἑαυτῶν τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον τρὶς καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Δι’ εὐχῶν· καὶ ὁ λαὸς Ἀμήν. Ὁ Ἱερεὺς λαβὼν συγχώρησιν, εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Ἱερὸν καὶ στὰς ἐνώπιον τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης ἐκφωνεῖ· Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν· ὁ ἀναγνώστης τὸ Τρισάγιον· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν ὁ ἀναγνώστης τὰ Τροπάρια, Σῶσον Κύριε, Δόξα Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ, Καὶ νῦν Προστασία φοβερά· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου δεόμεθά σου ἐπάκουσον καὶ ἐλέησον· οἱ Χοροὶ Κύριε ἐλέησον τρίς· Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐσεβῶν· Κύριε ἐλέησον τρίς· Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν· ἡ ἐκφώνησις, Ὅτι ἐλεήμων καὶ φιλάνθρωπος· ὁ Χορὸς Ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου εὐλόγησον Πάτερ· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Δόξα τῇ Ἁγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοουσίῳ καὶ ζωοποιῷ καὶ ἀδιαιρέτῳ Τριάδι, πάντοτε νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, Ἀμήν· καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος ἀκροωμένου τοῦ λαοῦ ἐν πάσῃ σιωπῇ καὶ κατανύξει· μετὰ τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον ἡ Μ. Συναπτὴ ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως καὶ ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Ὅτι πρέπει. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου ὡς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο ἡ Αἴτησις καὶ ἡ ἐκφώνησις, Ὅτι σὸν τὸ κράτος· Καθίσματα τὰ τῆς Παρακλητικῆς, ὁ Ν΄ Ψαλμός, οἱ Κανόνες τῆς Παρακλητικῆς, ἐν οἷς διὰ μὲν τὰ Κατανυκτικὰ τοῦ Κανόνος τροπάρια λέγομεν Στίχον τὸ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν Δόξα σοι· διὰ δὲ τὰ Μαρτυρικά, Ἅγιοι τοῦ Θεοῦ πρεσβεύσατε ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν, διὰ δὲ τὸν ἕτερον Κανόνα τῆς Παρακλητικῆς τῇ μὲν Δευτέρᾳ λέγομεν Ἀρχάγγελοι τοῦ Θεοῦ πρεσβεύσατε ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν· τῇ δὲ Τρίτῃ, Προφῆτα τοῦ Χριστοῦ πρέσβευε ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν· Τῇ Τετάρτῃ καὶ τῇ Παρασκευῇ, Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε Σῶσον ἡμᾶς· τῇ Πέμπτῃ Ἀπόστολοι τοῦ Χριστοῦ πρεσβεύσατε ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν, καὶ διὰ τὸν τοῦ ἁγίου Νικολάου, Ἅγιε τοῦ

*(Printed Page 116)*

=== LEAF p132 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Daily Service — Midnight Office Dismissal, Litany for Peace, Matins Enarxis, Royal Beginning, Six Psalms, Daily Canons (p. 117)]

117

and that He may have mercy on us." The Choirs: "Lord, have mercy " (3 times). The Priest: "Hear us, O God our Saviour, hope of all those who live at the far ends of the world... for You are the Gracious One and the Lover of Mankind, and we send up glory to You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and always and unto ages of ages." The Choirs: "Amen." Then, turning toward the people, the Priest does the Dismissal: "Glory to You, O God, our hope, glory to You! May Christ our true God, through the intercessions of His most pure and holy Mother; the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles and all the saints; have mercy upon us and save us, as a good loving and merciful God"; and coming down one step off the Vima [Sanctuary] toward the Soleas, he continues: "Let us pray for the peace of the world"; and the Choirs: "Lord, have mercy" continuously {without interruption as these Petitions are being chanted by the Priest}; The Priest continues "For all the pious and Orthodox Christians," "For our Archbishop [name]," and so on. Then "And let us also say for ourselves: Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy." And immediately, the Priest: "Through the prayers"; and the people "Amen." The Priest, having received forgiveness, enters into the Sanctuary and, standing in front of the Holy Table, exclaims "Blessed is our God"; the Reader recites the Trisagion; the Priest: "For Yours is." The Reader then recites the Hymns "O Lord, save Your people... Glory... O You Who were lifted up on the Cross... Now and ever... O awesome and ever-present protection." The Priest: "Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your steadfast love; we pray to You, hear us and have mercy." The Choirs: "Lord, have mercy" (3 times). "Again we pray for the faithful." The Choirs: "Lord, have mercy" (3 times). The Priest: "Again we pray for our Archbishop." [The Choirs: "Lord, have mercy" (3 times)]. Then, the Priest exclaims "For You are merciful and loving." The Choir: "In the name of the Lord, Father give the blessing," the Priest: "Glory to the Holy, consubstantial, life-giving, and undivided Trinity always, now and ever, and unto the Ages of Ages." "Amen." Then the Exapsalmos [Six Psalms] is read, the congregaton listening in total silence and piety; after the Exapsalmos, the Great Litany is done by the Priest and then the Exclamation "For to You belongs." At "God is the Lord," the Apolytikion of the Saint of the day and the Theotokion of the Mode as at Vespers are chanted; then the Psalter selection of the day is recited, and after this the Petition and the Exclamation "For Yours is the dominion." Then we sing the Kathismata of the Paraklitiki, then Psalm 50, and then the Kanons of the Paraklitiki, in which, for the Penitential Hymns of the Kanon, we say the Verse "Glory

*(Printed Page 117)*

=== LEAF p133 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Daily Service — Matins Daily Canons (cont.), Praises, Aposticha, The Daily Liturgy Antiphons (p. 118)]

118

Θεοῦ· καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ διὰ μὲν τὰ Μαρτυρικὰ Πρεσβείαις τῶν Μαρτύρων σου Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἀνάπαυσον τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν δούλων σου· διὰ δὲ τὰ νεκρώσιμα, Αἱ ψυχαὶ αὐτῶν ἐν ἀγαθοῖς αὐλισθήσονται, καὶ διὰ τὰ τῶν κεκοιμημένων, Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω καὶ προσελάβου Κύριε. Εἶτα λέγομεν τὸν Κανόνα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Μηναίου μετὰ τοῦ ἁρμοδίου στίχου, Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ πρέσβευε ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν (ἐὰν ὦσι δύο, Ἅγιοι τοῦ Θεοῦ)· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς ἐκ τοῦ Μηναίου, ἡ Αἴτησις, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ ὁ Εἱρμὸς καὶ ἡ Αἴτησις, τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἡμέρας (ὅρα ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ) ἐὰν μὴ ἔχῃ ὁ Ἅγιος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· εἶτα ἀναγινώσκονται καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ τοῦ Κανόνος Ὠδαί, ἀπ’ θ΄ Αἰνοῦμεν εὐλογοῦμεν καὶ προσκυνοῦμεν τὸν Κύριον, καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς, εἶτα στιχολογεῖται ἡ Τιμιωτέρα καὶ ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Μηναίου, ἡ Αἴτησις καὶ ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Ὅτι σὲ αἰνοῦσιν· τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἑβδομάδος (ὅρα ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ ἢ τῇ Παρακλητικῇ), εἶτα τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑωθινήν, καὶ μετὰ τὸ Σὸν γάρ ἐστι τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῆς Παρακλητικῆς μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτῶν· ὁ Α΄ Ἐνεπλήσθημεν τὸ πρωῒ τοῦ ἐλέους σου· καὶ ὁ Β΄ Καὶ ἔστω ἡ λαμπρότης Κυρίου τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡμῶν ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς (ὅρα ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ) Δόξα καὶ Νῦν τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ, τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, τὸ εἰς τὸ τέλος τοῦ Ὄρθρου Θεοτοκίον καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα·

Α΄.
Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ καὶ ψάλλειν τῷ ὀνόματί σου Ὕψιστε.
Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου Σῶτερ σῶσον ἡμᾶς.
Τοῦ ἀναγγέλλειν τὸ πρωῒ τὸ ἔλεός σου καὶ τὴν ἀλήθειάν σου κατὰ νύκτα.

*(Printed Page 118)*

=== LEAF p134 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Daily Service — Matins Daily Canons (cont.), Praises, Aposticha, The Daily Liturgy Antiphons (p. 119)]

119

to You, our God, glory to You"; for the Hymns of the Martyrs: "Holy Ones of God intercede for us." For the other Kanon of the Paraklitiki, on Monday we say "Archangels of God, pray for us": on Tuesday: "Prophet of Christ, pray to God for us"; on Wednesday and Friday: "Most holy Theotokos, save us"; on Thursday: "Apostles of Christ, pray for us"; and for the Kanon of Saint Nicholas: "Holy One of God." On Saturday, for the Hymns of Martyrs: "Through the prayers of your martyrs, Christ our God, give rest to the souls of your servants"; for the Hymns of the Dead: "Their souls shall dwell in prosperity" and for the Hymns of those fallen asleep: "Blessed are they whom You have chosen and taken to Yourself, O Lord." Then we say the Kanon of the Saint of the Mineon with the appropriate verse: "Holy One of God pray for us" (if there are two Saints: "Holy Ones of God"); after the Third Ode the Irmos from the Mineon is sung, the Petition, the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion; after the Sixth Ode, the Irmos and the Petition, the Kontakion of the day (see the Orologion) if the Saint does not have a Kontakion of his own, and then the Minologion {Synaxarion} of the Saints of the day is read. Then the rest of the Odes of the Kanon are read; after the 9th Ode "We praise, we bless and worship the Lord" and the Irmos of the 8th Ode is sung; then the "More honorable" with its verses is sung and the Irmos of the 9th Ode of the Mineon. Then the Petition and the Exclamation: "For all the powers"; the Exapostilarion of the Saint of the week (see in the Orologion or the Paraklitiki), then that of the Saint of the day from the Mineon and the Theotokion, and immediately "To You belongs all glory." The Priest: "Let us complete our morning prayer," and after "For to You belong mercy and salvation," the Aposticha of the Paraklitiki with their verses: the first, "We have early been satisfied with Your mercy"; and the second "And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us" (see the Orologion). Glory, Now and ever the Theotokion. The "It is a good thing to confess to the Lord," the Trisagion, "For Yours is," then the Theotokion at the end of Matins, and the Liturgy begins.

3.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

ANTIPHON ONE

"It is good to give thanks to the Lord, to sing praises to Your Name, O Most High." [Psalm 92:1 RSV]
"Through the prayers of the Theotokos, Saviour, save us!"
"To declare your steadfast love in the morning and your faithfulness by night" [Psalm 92:2 RSV]

*(Printed Page 119)*

=== LEAF p135 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Daily Service — The Daily Liturgy Antiphons (cont.), Antiphons 1, 2, and 3, Little Entrance (p. 120)]

120

Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου...
Ὅτι εὐθὺς Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀδικία ἐν αὐτῷ.
Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου...
Δόξα καὶ νῦν Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου...

Β΄.
Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν, εὐπρέπειαν ἐνεδύσατο, ἐνεδύσατο Κύριος δύναμιν καὶ περιεζώσατο.
Πρεσβείαις τῶν Ἁγίων σου σῶσον ἡμᾶς Κύριε.
Καὶ γὰρ ἐστερέωσε τὴν οἰκουμένην, ἥτις οὐ σαλευθήσεται.
Πρεσβείαις τῶν Ἁγίων σου...
Τῷ οἴκῳ σου πρέπει ἁγίασμα, Κύριε, εἰς μακρότητα ἡμερῶν.
Πρεσβείαις τῶν Ἁγίων σου... Δόξα.
Πρεσβείαις τῶν Ἁγίων σου... Καὶ νῦν.
Ὁ μονογενὴς Υἱὸς καὶ λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ...

Γ΄.
Δεῦτε ἀγαλλιασώμεθα τῷ Κυρίῳ, ἀλαλάξωμεν τῷ Θεῷ τῷ Σωτῆρι ἡμῶν.
Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, ψάλλοντάς σοι Ἀλληλούϊα.
Προφθάσωμεν τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ ἐν ἐξομολογήσει καὶ ἐν ψαλμοῖς ἀλαλάξωμεν αὐτῷ, ὅτι Θεὸς μέγας Κύριος καὶ βασιλεὺς μέγας ἐπὶ πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν.
Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, [ψάλλοντάς σοι Ἀλληλούϊα.]
Ὅτι ἐν τῇ χειρὶ αὐτοῦ τὰ πέρατα τῆς γῆς καὶ τὰ ὕψη τῶν ὀρέων αὐτοῦ εἰσιν, ὅτι αὐτοῦ ἐστιν ἡ θάλασσα, καὶ αὐτὸς ἐποίησεν αὐτὴν καὶ τὴν ξηρὰν αἱ χεῖρες αὐτοῦ ἔπλασαν.
Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, ψάλλοντάς σοι Ἀλληλούϊα.
Μετὰ τὴν εἴσοδον, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν καὶ προσπέσωμεν

*(Printed Page 120)*

=== LEAF p136 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Daily Service — The Daily Liturgy Antiphons (cont.), Antiphons 1, 2, and 3, Little Entrance (p. 121)]

121

"Through the prayers of the Theotokos, Saviour, save us!"
"The Lord our God is upright; and there is no unrighteousness in Him." [Psalm 92:15 RSV]
"Through the prayers of the Theotokos, Saviour, save us!"
"Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen."
"Through the prayers of the Theotokos, Saviour, save us!"

ANTIPHON TWO

"The Lord is king, he is robed in majesty; the Lord is robed, he is girded with strength." [Psalm 93:1 RSV]
"Through the prayers of your saints, O Saviour, save us!"
"He has established the world; it shall never be moved." [Psalm 93:1 RSV]
"Through the prayers of your saints, O Saviour, save us!"
"Holiness befits your house, O Lord, forevermore." [Psalm 93:5 RSV]
"Through the prayers of your saints, O Saviour, save us!"
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.
"Through the prayers of your saints, O Saviour, save us!"
Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.
"O Only-begotten Son and Word of God..."

ANTIPHON THREE

"O come, let us sing to the Lord; let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation!" [Psalm 95:1 RSV]
"O Son of God, wonderful in Your saints, save us who sing to You: Alleluia!"
"Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving; let us make a joyful noise to Him with songs of praise! For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods." [Psalm 95:2-3 RSV]
"O Son of God, wonderful in Your saints, save us who sing to You: Alleluia!"
"In his hands are the depths of the earth; the heights of the mountains are his also. The sea is his, for he made it, and the dry land, which his hands have formed." [Psalm 95:4-5 RSV]
"O Son of God, wonderful in Your saints, save us who sing to You: Alleluia!"
After the Entrance: "O come let us worship and bow down to Christ. O Son of God, wonderful in Your saints, save us who sing to You:

*(Printed Page 121)*

=== LEAF p137 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Daily Service — Daily Liturgy Troparia, First Hour without Liturgy, Saturday Matins Variant, Pre-feast and Post-feast Vespers (p. 122)]

122

Χριστῷ σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, ψάλλοντάς σοι Ἀλληλούϊα· τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἡμέρας τῆς ἑβδομάδος (ὅρα ταῦτα ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ)· τῇ Δευτέρᾳ, Ἀρχιστράτηγοι Θεοῦ· τῇ Τρίτῃ, Προφῆτα Θεοῦ καὶ πρόδρομε· τῇ Τετάρτῃ καὶ τῇ Παρασκευῇ, Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ· τῇ Πέμπτῃ, Τοὺς ἀσφαλεῖς καὶ θεοφθόγγους· τῷ Σαββάτῳ, Ὡς ἀπαρχὰς τῆς φύσεως,² τὸ Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας· εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἡμέρας, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, ὁ Ἱερεὺς τὴν Ὀπισθάμβωνον εὐχήν, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου ἐκ γ΄ Εὐλογία Κυρίου· ἡ μεγάλη Ἀπόλυσις καὶ τὸ Δι’ εὐχῶν.

Ὅταν δὲ μετὰ τὸν Ὄρθρον μὴ ἕπηται Λειτουργία, εὐθὺς μετὰ τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι λέγεται τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας, εὐθὺς Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν καὶ συνάπτεται ἡ Α΄ Ὥρα, καὶ μετ’ αὐτὴν ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας, εἶτα ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου κτλ... Ὅτι ἐλεήμων καὶ φιλάνθρωπος θεὸς ὑπάρχεις καὶ σοὶ τὴν δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ τῷ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, Ἀμήν. Σοφία, ὁ ὢν εὐλογητός· ὁ Χορός, Στερεώσαι Κύριος ὁ Θεός· ὁ Ἱερεὺς, Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡ ἐλπὶς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· τὴν μεγάλην ἀπόλυσιν καὶ τὸ Δι’ εὐχῶν.

Ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Σαββάτου εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ἐὰν ὁ Ἅγιος μὴ ἔχῃ μήτε Ἐξαποστειλάριον, μήτε Αἴνους, ψάλλομεν Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὰ τῆς ἡμέρας (ἅτινα ὅρα ἐν τῷ τέλει τῆς Παρακλητικῆς ἢ ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Ὡρολογίου), εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ τῆς Παρακλητικῆς τῶν Αἴνων Στιχηρά, ὡς καὶ τὸ Δόξα Καὶ νῦν, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει, Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑωθινὴν κτλ. Σὸν γάρ ἐστιν καὶ τὰ Νεκρώσιμα Ἀπόστιχα Προσόμοια, τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπόστολοι, Μάρτυρες καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία.

4.    Ὅταν ἡ ἡμέρα τύχῃ προεόρτιος ἢ μεθέορτος Δεσποτικῆς ἢ Θεομητορικῆς ἑορτῆς, τύχῃ δὲ καὶ Ἅγιος ἔχων Δοξαστικά, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ ψάλλομεν Στιχηρὰ προεόρτια ἢ μεθέορτα γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου

---

2.    Τινὲς ψάλλουσι καθ' ἑκάστην Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν.

*(Printed Page 122)*

=== LEAF p138 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Daily Service — Daily Liturgy Troparia, First Hour without Liturgy, Saturday Matins Variant, Pre-feast and Post-feast Vespers (p. 123)]

123

Alleluia."; the Apolytikion of the Saint of the day, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion of the day of the week (for these, look in the Orologion). On Monday: "O Archgenerals of God's armies"; on Tuesday: "O prophet of God and forerunner of grace"; on Wednesday and Friday: "O Christ our God, who chose of your own free will to be raised upon the cross"; on Thursday: "Your infallible and God-speaking preachers,"; on Saturday: "As the first-fruits of nature."² The Trisagion, the Apostolos and Gospel of the day; at "Especially," "It is meet and right"; the Communion Hymn of the day "We have seen the [true] light." The Priest recites the Prayer behind the Ambo [Pulpit] "Blessed be the name of the Lord " (3 times). "The Blessing of the Lord," the Great Dismissal and "Through the prayers."

When a Liturgy does not follow Matins, then immediately after "It is good to give thanks to the Lord" the Trisagion is recited, then the Apolytikion of the Saint of the day, then immediately "O Come let us worship," and the 1st Hour begins, after which the Apostolos and the Gospel of the day are recited. Then the Priest: "Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy; ... For You are a merciful and loving God, and to You we give glory, to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen. Wisdom, Blessed are You"; the Choir: "O Christ God, make firm"; the Priest: "Glory to You, God, our hope, glory to You"; then the Great Dismissal and "Through the intercessions."

On Saturday in Matins, if the Saint has neither an Exapostilarion, nor Praises, we sing the Exapostilaria of the day (which can be found either at the end of the Paraklitiki or at the end of the Orologion). At the Praises, we sing the Stichira of the Praises from the Paraklitiki, as well as Glory, Now and ever the Theotokion. Then "To You belongs Glory, ... Let us complete our morning prayer ... etc., For Your it is"; then we chant the Aposticha Prosomia of the Dead. Then "It is just to confess," the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Apostles, Martyrs" and subsequently the Liturgy follows.

4.    When the day is either a Pre-feast or Post-feast day of Feasts of the Lord or the Theotokos, and the Saint of the day has Doxastika, in Vespers we sing 3 Stichira of the Pre-feast or Post-feast and 3 of the Saint. Glory of

---

2. Some sing the Kontakion "Protection of all Christians" on every day.

*(Printed Page 123)*

=== LEAF p139 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Daily Service — Pre-feast and Post-feast Vespers (cont.), Matins and Divine Liturgy with a Celebrated Saint (p. 124)]

124

γ΄· Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ προεόρτιον ἢ τὸ μεθέορτον, ἐν τοῖς Ἀποστίχοις τὰ προεόρτια, ἢ τὰ μεθέορτα, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ νῦν τὸ προεόρτιον ἢ τὸ μεθέορτον, Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ προεόρτιον ἢ τὸ μεθέορτον, ἡ Ἀπόλυσις μετὰ τοῦ χαρακτηριστικοῦ τῆς ἑορτῆς κατὰ τὰς μεθεόρτους ἡμέρας, οὐχὶ δὲ καὶ κατὰ τὰς προεορτίους.

5.    Τὸ πρωΐ, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, τὰ προεόρτια Καθίσματα (ἐὰν ὑπάρχωσιν) ἢ τὰ μεθέορτα, ὁ προεόρτιος Κανὼν ἢ ὁ μεθέορτος, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ προεόρτιον ἢ τὸ μεθέορτον, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ προεόρτιον Κοντάκιον ἢ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, μετὰ τὴν Θ΄ ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου (ἐὰν ἔχῃ) καὶ τὸ προεόρτιον ἢ μεθέορτον· ἐὰν ὁ Ἅγιος ἔχῃ Αἴνους, ψάλλεται τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν προεόρτιον ἢ μεθέορτον· εἰ δὲ μὴ ἔχῃ, μετὰ τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια εὐθὺς τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει, Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑωθινήν· ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Σὸν γάρ ἐστι καὶ τὰ προεόρτια ἢ μεθέορτα Ἀπόστιχα, ὡς καὶ τὸ Δόξα Καὶ νῦν, τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον ἢ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλομεν ἐν μὲν ταῖς προεορτίοις ἡμέραις Ἀντίφωνα τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ, ὡς καὶ ἐν πάσαις ταῖς καθημεριναῖς Λειτουργίαις, ἐν δὲ ταῖς μεθεόρτοις ἡμέραις τὰ τῶν ἑορτῶν Ἀντίφωνα³ ἀλλ’ εἰς τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν... σῶσον ἡμᾶς μετὰ τοῦ χαρακτηριστικοῦ τῆς τυχούσης ἑορτῆς. Ἀπολυτίκιον τὸ προεόρτιον ἢ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον προεόρτιον, ἢ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας· εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

---

3.    Τινὲς καὶ εἰς τὰς μεθεόρτους ἡμέρας ψάλλουσι τα καθημερινὰ Ἀντίφωνα

*(Printed Page 124)*

=== LEAF p140 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Daily Service — Pre-feast and Post-feast Vespers (cont.), Matins and Divine Liturgy with a Celebrated Saint (p. 125)]

125

the Saint, Now and ever of the Pre-feast or Post-feast. Then we chant the Aposticha of the Pre-feast or the Post-feast. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Pre-feast or Post-feast. Then the Apolytikion of the Saint and that of the Pre-feast or Post-feast. Then the Dismissal Prayer, using on the Post-feast days, but not on the Pre-feast days, the characteristic phrases of the Feast.

5.    In the morning, at "God is the Lord," the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Kathismata of the Pre-feast (if there are any) or of the Post-feast. Then the Kanon of the Pre-feast or the Post-feast, and that of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint and that of the Pre-feast or the Post-feast. After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion of the Pre-feast or of the Feast, and the Minologion of the Saints of the day. After the 9th Ode of the Kanon, the Irmos of the 8th Ode of the Saint's Kanon, and then we sing "More honorable." Then the Exapostilarion of the Saint (if there is one) and that of the Pre-feast or Post-feast. If the Saint has Praises, "Let everything that has breath" and the Stichira of the Saint are chanted, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever that of the Pre-feast or Post-feast. If the Saint has no Praises, then, after the Exapostilaria we chant immediately the "To You belongs glory" [the Lesser Doxology], then "Let us complete our morning prayer," the Exclamation "For Yours it is . . ." then the Aposticha of the Pre-feast or the Post-feast, as well as the Glory, Now and ever. Then we recite "It is just to confess" and the Trisagion. Then we chant the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast or of the feast. Then the Liturgy begins, in which we sing on days of the Pre-feast the Antiphons "It is good to give thanks to the Lord," as on all weekday Liturgies. On days of the Post-feast, we chant the Antiphons of the pertinent Feasts,³ but at the Entrance we chant "Come let us worship . . . save us" with the characteristic phrase of the feast at hand. Then we chant the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast or the feast, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion of the Pre-feast, or of the feast. The Apostolos and Gospel of the day are recited. At "Especially," "It is meet." The Communion Hymn of the day and the Dismissal.

---

3. Some sing the daily Antiphons even on Post-feast days

*(Printed Page 125)*
