=== LEAF p721 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday of Second Week of Great Lent (§§ 32–34 Opening) (p. 706)]

706

32.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς β΄ ἑβδομάδος, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τὴν πνευματικὴν ἀδελφοὶ δίς, τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, τὰ γ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς Προσόμοια καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τοῦ Μηναίου, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ καθεξῆς, ἡ θεία Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.
33.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε, ἐκέκραξα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Νῦν καιρὸς εὐπρόσδεκτος δίς, τὰ δ΄ τοῦ ἤχου Μαρτυρικὰ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τοῦ Μηναίου, Δόξα, τὸ Νεκρώσιμον, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας τὸ μικρὸν Ἀπόδειπνον, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ τῶν Οἴκων τῆς Θεοτόκου β΄ Στάσις κτλ. ὡς εἴθισται (ἴδε § 26)

34.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸ Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν καὶ τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,[*] τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια Ἀπόστολοι Μάρτυρες, Δόξα, Μνήσθητι Κύριε, Καὶ νῦν, Μήτηρ ἁγία, τὸ Ψαλτήριον [Κάθισμα Δέκατον Ἕκτον], τὰ Μαρτυρικὰ Καθίσματα μετὰ τοῦ Νεκρωσίμου καὶ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου τοῦ τῆς ἑβδομάδος ἤχου, ὁ Ἄμωμος [Ψαλμὸς 118 (Κάθισμα Δέκατον Ἕβδομον)] εἰς β΄ Στάσεις (ὅρα τὴν τάξιν ἐν τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν § 7), τὰ νεκρώσιμα Εὐλογητάρια καὶ μνημονεύει ὁ Ἱερεὺς τῶν κεκοιμημένων εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων χριστιανῶν, εἶτα τὰ Τροπάρια Ἀνάπαυσον Σωτὴρ ἡμῶν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ἐκ Παρθένου ἀνατείλας, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας μόνος μέχρι τῆς ε΄ Ὠδῆς· ἀπὸ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς, ἄρχονται τὰ Τριῴδια μέχρι τῆς θ΄, προταττομένου τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς, Τὸν ἐξ ἀνάρχου τοῦ Πατρός, καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, ὁ Εἱρμὸς Σὲ τὴν ἀθάνατον πηγήν, τὸ νεκρώσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ὁ καὶ νεκρῶν καὶ ζώντων, καὶ τὸ Ἡμεῖς ἐν σοὶ καυχώμεθα θεοτόκε. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Μαρτυρικὰ τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου τῆς ἑβδομάδος,

[*] [Σημειωτέον ὅτι εἰς τὴν Προθεωρίαν, §19, ὁ Βιολάκης ὁρίζει ὅτι εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον τῶν Σαββάτων τῆς Μ. Τεσσαρακοστῆς, ἐὰν δὲν ἑορτάζεται ἐπισήμως τις Ἅγιος, ἀντὶ τοῦ «Θεὸς Κύριος» νὰ ψάλλεται τὸ «Ἀλληλούϊα» δὶς χωρὶς στίχων, καὶ δὶς μετὰ τῶν 2 στίχων «Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω [καὶ προσελάβου, Κύριε] καὶ «Καὶ τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτῶν [εἰς γενεὰν καὶ γενεάν.]» Τὸ λειτουργικὸν βιβλίον Τριῴδιον εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον τοῦ Σαββάτου τῆς Β΄. Ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν ἀκολουθεῖ τὴν ἰδίαν τάξιν. Εἰς τὸ Τυπικὸν, §34, εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον τοῦ Σαββάτου τῆς Β΄. Ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νυστειῶν ὅμως, πιθανὸν ἕνεκα παραβλέψεως, ὁ Βιολάκης ἐπανέρχεται εἰς τὴν συνήθη τάξιν τοῦ «Θεὸς Κύριος,» ἡ ὁποία εὑρίσκεται εἰς τοὺς πλείστους Ὄρθρους. (Ὅρα ἐπίσης τὰ σχόλια εἰς τὰ Δίπτυχα, 1994, σελ. 71, καὶ εἰς τὸ Ἡμερολόγιον τοῦ Οἰκουμενικοῦ Πατριαρχείου, 2010, σελ. 128, ὑποσημ. 36.)]

*(Printed Page 706)*

=== LEAF p722 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday of Second Week of Great Lent (§§ 32–34 Opening) (p. 707)]

707

32.    Wednesday of the Second Week, in Vespers at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the Idiomelon “Having undertaken the spiritual fast, brothers” (2 times), the Martyrikon (once), three Prosomia of the sequence of the Triodion and four from the Mineon, Glory, Now and ever the Theotokion [from the Mineon]. The Readings of the day, the “Let my prayer arise,” and then the Holy Liturgy of the Presanctified follows.
33.    Friday at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” we chant the Idiomelon “Now is the acceptable time” (2 times), four Martyrika of the Mode, four Stichira from the Mineon, Glory of the Departed, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode; the Readings of the day. Then “Let my prayer arise” and the Liturgy of the Presanctified [Gifts] is done.
    That evening we do the Small Compline, and the Second Stasis of the Ikos of the Theotokos is read, etc., as is customary (see Paragraph 26 above.)
34.    Saturday at Matins, after the Midnight Prayer and the Exapsalmos, at “God is the Lord” [*], the Apolytikia “Apostles, Martyrs,” Glory, “Remember, O Lord,” Now and ever, “Holy Mother.” Then the [designated Kathisma of the] Psalter “The Lord said to my Lord”; then the Martyrika Kathismata with the Kathisma of the Departed and the Theotokion of the Mode of the week. Then the Amomos [Psalm 118] in two Stanzas (see the order of items in Saturday of the Souls, Paragraph 7). Then the Evlogitaria of the Departed. Then the Priest commemorates the departed pious and Orthodox Christians. Then the following Hymns are sung “Give rest, our Savior,” Now and ever, “You Who dawned upon the world from a Virgin,” Psalm 50, the Canon of the Saint of the day and only that Canon until the Fifth Ode. From the Sixth Ode, the Triodia Canons are sung until the Ninth Ode preceded by the Canon of the Saint. Then the Irmos of the Eighth Ode “The one beginningless from the Father.” Then we chant with verses the “More honorable,” the Irmos of the Ninth Ode “You, the immortal spring.” Then we sing the Exapostilarion of the Departed “You Who rules the living and the dead” and the “O Mother of God, we boast

[*] [It should be noted that in the Protheoria, Paragraph 19, Violakis stipulates that in the Matins of the Saturdays of Great Lent, if no formal saint is celebrated, that instead of the “God is the Lord,” the “Alleluia” is chanted: twice without verses and twice with the 2 Verses “Blessed are they whom You have chosen [and taken unto You, Lord]” and “And their memorial [shall be from generation to generation].” The liturgical book Triodion in the Matins of Saturday of the Second Week of Lent, follows the same format. However, in the Typikon, Paragraph 34, on the Matins of the Saturday of the Second Week of Great Lent, possibly through an editorial oversight, Violakis reverts to the regular order of “God is the Lord,” common to most Matins services. (See also comments in Diptycha, 1994, p. 71 and in the Imerologion tu Ikumeniku Patriarchiu, 2010, p. 128, fn. 36)]

*(Printed Page 707)*

=== LEAF p723 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Second Saturday Concluded and Second Sunday of Lent (Saint Gregory Palamas) (§§ 34 Concluded, 35, 36 Opening) (p. 708)]

708

Δόξα, τὸ Νεκρώσιμον, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτοκίον, καὶ τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν (ταῦτα πάντα ὅρα ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Τριῳδίου), Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπόστολοι Μάρτυρες, καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλομεν Ἀντίφωνα τὰ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ Ἀπόστολοι Μάρτυρες, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὡς ἀπαρχὰς τῆς φύσεως. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, εἶτα μνημονεύονται αὖθις τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν κεκοιμημένων εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων χριστιανῶν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Οὗτος ὁ τύπος ὀφείλει γίνεσθαι κατὰ πᾶν Σάββατον μέχρι τοῦ τῆς Δ΄ ἑβδομάδος.

ΚΥΡΙΑΚΗ Β΄ ΤΩΝ ΝΗΣΤΕΙΩΝ

35.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

36.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ {Τριαδικὰ} Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ ἀναστάσιμος Κανὼν καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου (ἐκ τοῦ Τριῳδίου)· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον,

*(Printed Page 708)*

=== LEAF p724 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Second Saturday Concluded and Second Sunday of Lent (Saint Gregory Palamas) (§§ 34 Concluded, 35, 36 Opening) (p. 709)]

709

of you.” At the Praises: the Martyrika of the Mode of the week, Glory of the Departed; Now and ever the Theotokion. Then “To You belongs glory”; the Aposticha of the Mode and the Glory, Now and ever (for all of these see the end of the Triodion.) Then, “It is good to confess,” the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Apostles, Martyrs,” and the Liturgy begins, in which we sing the Antiphons: “It is good to confess.” After the Entrance, the Apolytikia “Apostles, Martyrs” and that of the Saint of the Church, the Kontakion “{To You, O Lord,} as author of all creation.” At “Especially,” “It is meet,” the Communion Hymn [Kinonikon] “Blessed are they whom You have chosen,” “We have seen the [True] Light,” then immediately are commemorated the names of the departed pious and Orthodox Christians and the Dismissal.
This order should be done every Saturday until the Fourth Week of Lent.

SECOND SUNDAY OF LENT

35.    Saturday at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing six Resurrection Stichira and four Stichira of Saint Gregory {Palamas}. Glory of the Saint (Doxastikon tu Agiu); Now and ever the First Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “O virgin without groom,” then we chant the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Theotokion; then the Dismissal.
36.    On Sunday in Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the {Triadic} “It is meet,” the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the [Kathisma of the] Psalter and the Amomos [Psalm 118]. The Resurrection Kathismata, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon; the Resurrection Canon and that of the Saint {from the Triodion}. After the Third Ode, the Kontakion of the Saint, then his Kathisma and its Theotokion. After the Sixth Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos, the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth” and the entire order of the Matins Gospels for Sundays of the Triodion; then we chant with verses “More honorable.” Then the Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: four Stichira

*(Printed Page 709)*

=== LEAF p725 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Second Sunday Concluded and Third Sunday of Lent (Veneration of the Precious Cross) (§§ 36 Concluded, 37, 38, 39 Opening) (p. 710)]

710

τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄ ²⁴, Δόξα, Τοῖς ἐν σκότει ἁμαρτημάτων, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
37.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου [ἐκ τοῦ Τριῳδίου]. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς κτλ. Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τὸ ἑσπέρας ὅρα τὴν διάταξιν ἐν τῇ προλαβούσῃ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας § 31.
Τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τῆς Τετάρτης καὶ τῆς Παρασκευῆς ὡς καὶ τοῦ Σαββάτου τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης ὅρα ἐν τῇ προλαβούσῃ ἑβδομάδι ἐν § 32, 33, 34.

ΚΥΡΙΑΚΗ Γ΄ ΤΩΝ ΝΗΣΤΕΙΩΝ
ΤΗΣ ΣΤΑΥΡΟΠΡΟΣΚΥΝΗΣΕΩΣ

38.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Σταυροῦ δ΄, Δόξα, Χριστὲ ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ συμμαχήσας Κύριε, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, Δόξα, Σῶσον Κύριε, Καὶ νῦν, Τοῦ Γαβριὴλ φθεγξαμένου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
39.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς Λιτῆς Ὁρῶσά σε ἡ κτίσις ἅπασα καὶ τὰ {Τριαδικὰ} Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σῶσον Κύριε καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, Δόξα, τὸ τοῦ Σταυροῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Τοῦ Γαβριὴλ φθεγξαμένου, τὸ Ψαλτήριον, ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ μετὰ τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν

24. Εἰς τὰ δύο τελευταῖα τῶν Αἴνων Τροπάρια τοῦ Ἁγίου ψάλλονται Στίχοι Τὸ στόμα μου λαλήσει σοφίαν καὶ ἡ μελέτη τῆς καρδίας μου σύνεσιν καὶ τὸ Οἱ ἱερεῖς σου, Κύριε, ἐνδύσονται δικαιοσύνην, καὶ οἱ ὅσιοί σου ἀγαλλιάσει ἀγαλλιάσονται.

*(Printed Page 710)*

=== LEAF p726 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Second Sunday Concluded and Third Sunday of Lent (Veneration of the Precious Cross) (§§ 36 Concluded, 37, 38, 39 Opening) (p. 711)]

711

of the Resurrection and four of the Saint,²⁴ Glory, “Those in the darkness of sin,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” the Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
37.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and four Makarismi of the Mode and four Troparia from the Sixth Ode of the Canon of the Saint {from the Triodion}. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of St. Gregory, that of Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “To the Champion General.” The Apostolos (Hebrews 1:10-2:3) and Gospel (Mark 2:1-12) etc. The Communion Hymn {Kinonikon} ”Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [True] Light,” and the Dismissal.
In the evening, see the order of service of the previous Sunday Vespers, Paragraph 31.
For the rubrics of the services of Wednesday and Friday as well as for Saturday of this week see Paragraphs 32, 33, and 34 of the previous week.

THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT
VENERATION OF THE CROSS

38.    Saturday evening, at “Lord, I have cried,” we chant six Resurrection Stichira and four of the Cross. Glory, “O Christ our God,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Stichira of the Resurrection. Glory, Now and ever, “O Lord, Who was an ally.” The Resurrection Apolytikion, Glory, “O Lord, save {Your people},” Now and ever, “As Gabriel cried unto you,” and the Dismissal.
39.    Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon; Glory, Now and ever of the Liti “All creation seeing you.” The Triadic “It is meet,” the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “O Lord, save {Your people}” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion, Glory the Apolytikion of the Cross, Now and ever, “As Gabriel cried unto you”; then {the designated Kathisma of} the Psalter, the Polyeleos {Psalm 134 and 135}, the Resurrection Kathismata in order and after the Second Section

24. At the last two Hymns of the Praises of the Saint these two Verses are sung: 1) “My mouth shall speak wisdom; the meditation of my heart shall be understanding,” (Psalm 49:3) and 2) “Let Your priests, Lord, be clothed with righteousness,” and “Let Your righteous exult with joy.” (Psalm 132:9).

*(Printed Page 711)*

=== LEAF p727 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Third Sunday of Lent (Matins of the Holy Cross and Solemn Procession) (§ 39 Concluded) (p. 712)]

712

τὸ Ἐν παραδείσῳ μὲν τὸ πρὶν δίς ²⁵, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Τριῳδίου εἰς η΄· πρῶτον ὁ Εἱρμὸς Ὁ θειότατος προετύπωσεν, εἶτα εἰς τὸ α΄ Τροπάριον ἑκάστης Ὠδῆς Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ Ἀναστάσει σου, καὶ εἰς τὰ λοιπὰ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι, εἰς δὲ τὰ δύο τελευταῖα Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου κατὰ σειράν, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ αὐτοῦ, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ὁ θειότατος προετύπωσε καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους ²⁶, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ Προσόμοια τοῦ Σταυροῦ δ΄, Δόξα, Τὴν ὑψηλόφρονα γνώμην, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ μετ’ αὐτὴν ψάλλεται ὑπὸ Χορῶν τὸ Ἀσματικὸν Ἅγιος ὁ Θεός καὶ γίνεται ἡ Εἴσοδος τοῦ τιμίου Σταυροῦ ὡς ἐφεξῆς. Οἱ Χοροὶ κατερχόμενοι μεταβαίνουσιν εἰς τὴν βόρειον τοῦ Ἱεροῦ πύλην ψάλλοντες, ὁ δὲ Ἱερεὺς ἐνδεδυμένος τὴν στολὴν αὐτοῦ, θυμιᾷ τὴν ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν καὶ τὸν τίμιον Σταυρὸν κείμενον ἐπὶ τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης ἐπὶ δίσκου ηὐτρεπισμένου μετὰ ἀνθέων καὶ τριῶν κηρῶν καὶ θυμιάσας αἴρει αὐτὸν ἐπὶ κεφαλῆς καὶ ἐξέρχεται ἀπὸ τῆς βορείου Πύλης τοῦ Βήματος, προπορευομένων αὐτοῦ λαμπάδων, ἑξαπτερύγων, καὶ δύο θυμιατῶν καὶ τοῦ Πριμικηρίου κρατοῦντος τὸ Διβάμβουλον· ὅταν φθάσῃ εἰς τὸ μέσον τοῦ Ναοῦ, ὅπου ἵσταται προηυτρεπισμένον τὸ τετραπόδιον, ποιεῖ τρεῖς κύκλους περὶ αὐτό, εἶτα βλέπων πρὸς ἀνατολὰς ἐκφωνεῖ Σοφία, ὀρθοί, καὶ θεὶς τὸν δίσκον μετὰ τοῦ Σταυροῦ ἐπὶ τοῦ τετραποδίου, θυμιᾷ σταυροειδῶς ψάλλων τὸ Σῶσον Κύριε τὸν λαόν σου, τὸ αὐτὸ ψάλλουσι καὶ οἱ δύο Χοροί· εἶτα ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται τοῦ θρόνου καὶ στὰς ἐνώπιον τοῦ τετραποδίου, προσκυνεῖ τὸν τίμιον Σταυρὸν ψάλλων Τὸν Σταυρόν σου προσκυνοῦμεν Δέσποτα ἅπαξ, τὸ αὐτὸ δὲ ἐπαναλαμβάνουσι καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ἀνὰ μίαν· ἔπειτα εὐλογήσας τὸν λαόν, τῶν Χορῶν ψαλλόντων τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη, ἀνέρχεται αὖθις εἰς τὸν θρόνον·

25. Εὐλογητάρια οὐ λέγονται.
26. Ὁ Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ χοροστατῶν Ἀρχιερεὺς) οὐκ ἀσπάζεται τὰς ἁγίας Εἰκόνας, κατὰ τὸ ἔθος, ὡς μέλλων μετ’ ὀλίγον ἀσπάσασθαι αὐτὸν τὸν τίμιον Σταυρόν.

*(Printed Page 712)*

=== LEAF p728 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Third Sunday of Lent (Matins of the Holy Cross and Solemn Procession) (§ 39 Concluded) (p. 713)]

713

[Stichologia]: “In paradise” (2 times)²⁵ then the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canon of the Triodion with eight verses; first the Irmos “Of old the divine Moses foreshadowed Your Cross.” Before the first Hymn of each Ode, “Glory to Your Holy Resurrection,” and before the rest [i.e. the remaining Odes,] “Glory to You, our God, glory to You.” At the last two verses: Glory, Now and ever. After the Third Ode, the Kathismata of the Triodion in order; after the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion; the Minologion and the Postscript of this Sunday {of the Triodion}. The Katavasie “Of old the divine Moses foreshadowed Your Cross” and the entire order of the Matins Gospels for Sundays of the Triodion. Then we chant with verses the “More honorable,” then the Resurrection Exapostilarion, that of the Triodion and then the Theotokion. At the Praises²⁶: four Resurrection Stichira and four Prosomia of the Cross, Glory, “The elevated high-aspiring opinion,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” the Great Doxology at the conclusion of which the choirs sing the Melismatic [Asmatikon] {Holy God} and the Entrance of the Holy Cross takes place as follows: The choirs singing {the Asmatikon} come down and move to the North Door of the Altar [Sanctuary]. The Priest, fully vested, censes the Holy Table and the Holy Cross which is placed on the Holy Table on a tray decorated with flowers and three candles. Having completed the censing, he raises it [the tray] over his head and exits from the North Door of the Vima [Sanctuary], preceeded by candles, Exapteryga (six-winged fans), two censers and the Primikyrios [Dean of the Church] carrying the Divamvulon [see Glossary]. When the Priest reaches the middle of the Church, where there stands a previously decorated four-legged table, he makes three circles around it, then, facing Eastward he exclaims “Wisdom! Let us arise!” and places the tray with the Cross upon the four-legged table, censing in a cross-wise manner and chanting “O Lord, save Your people”; which is repeated by each of the two choirs. The Patriarch then descends from the throne and, standing in front of the table, venerates the Holy Cross chanting “Your Cross we worship, O Master,” once. This is repeated once by each of the choirs. While the Patriarch blesses the people, the choirs sing “For many years {Master}.” After the blessing, he returns immediately to

25. The Evlogitaria are not said.
26. The Patriarch (or officiating Hierarch) does not venerate (kiss) the Holy Icons at this time, as is customary, since he will shortly venerate the Holy Cross itself.

*(Printed Page 713)*

=== LEAF p729 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Third Sunday of Lent (Veneration of the Holy Cross and Divine Liturgy Antiphons) (§§ 39 Concluded, 40) (p. 714)]

714

οἱ δὲ Ἀρχιερεῖς ἀνὰ δύο κατὰ τάξιν προσκυνοῦσι τὸν τίμιον Σταυρὸν καὶ λαμβάνουσι παρὰ τοῦ Πατριάρχου ἄνθη, ὡς καὶ οἱ Ὀφφικιάλοι ²⁷, ψάλλοντος τοῦ β΄ Χοροῦ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δεῦτε πιστοί, μετὰ τοῦτο ψάλλεται τὸ Σῶσον Κύριε καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.

40.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα.

Ἀντίφωνον Α΄.
Ἐσημειώθη ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς τὸ φῶς τοῦ προσώπου σου, Κύριε.
Ἔδωκας τοῖς φοβουμένοις σε σημείωσιν τοῦ φυγεῖν ἀπὸ προσώπου τόξου.
Ἀνέβης εἰς ὕψος, ᾐχμαλώτευσας αἰχμαλωσίαν.
Ἔδωκας κληρονομίαν τοῖς φοβουμένοις τὸ ὄνομά σου, Κύριε.
[Δόξα καὶ νῦν. Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς θεοτόκου...]
(Refrain: Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου...)

Ἀντίφωνον Β΄.
Εἴδοσαν πάντα τὰ πέρατα τῆς γῆς τὸ σωτήριον τοῦ θεοῦ ἡμῶν.
Προσκυνήσωμεν εἰς τὸν τόπον, οὗ ἔστησαν οἱ πόδες αὐτοῦ.
Ὁ δὲ θεὸς βασιλεὺς ἡμῶν πρὸ αἰώνων εἰργάσατο σωτηρίαν ἐν μέσῳ τῆς γῆς.
Ὑψωθήσομαι ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν· ὑψωθήσομαι ἐν τῇ γῇ.
[Δόξα καὶ νῦν. Ὁ Μονογενὴς Υἱός...]
(Refrain: Σῶσον ἡμᾶς... ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν [ψάλλοντάς Σοι, Ἀλληλούϊα.])

27. Ἐννοεῖται οἴκοθεν ὅτι εἷς τῶν Ἱερέων ἀκολούθως περιφέρει τὸν τίμιον Σταυρὸν εἰς πάντας τοὺς ἐκκλησιαζομένους ἄνδρας τε καὶ γυναῖκας ὅπως προσκυνήσωσιν αὐτὸν καὶ λάβωσιν ἄνθη, ὡς εἴθισται, ἐκ τῶν χειρῶν αὐτοῦ. Τοῦτο βεβαίως γίνεται πανταχοῦ ὅπου ὑπάρχουσι πλείονες Ἱερεῖς· εἰ δὲ μή, αὐτὸς ὁ λειτουργῶν Ἱερεὺς ἐκτελεῖ τὸ καθῆκον τοῦτο, καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι τὰ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ Ἰδιόμελα, μέχρις οὗ ἀποπερατωθῇ τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ.

*(Printed Page 714)*

=== LEAF p730 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Third Sunday of Lent (Veneration of the Holy Cross and Divine Liturgy Antiphons) (§§ 39 Concluded, 40) (p. 715)]

715

the throne, and the Hierarchs in double file, in order of seniority, come forward in order to venerate the Holy Cross and receive flowers from the Patriarch as do the other officials [Offikion Holders],²⁷ the Second Choir singing the Idiomelon “Come, you believers”; after this, “Lord, save {Your people}” is chanted and the Liturgy begins.
40.    In the Liturgy, the following Antiphons are chanted:

First Antiphon:
“The light of Your countenance was marked upon us, O Lord!” (Psalm 4:7).
“You have set up a banner for those who fear You, to rally to it from the bow.” (Psalm 59-4/60:4).
“You did ascend the high mount, leading captives in Your train, [and receiving gifts among men].” (Psalm 67:18/68:18).
“You have given me the heritage of those who fear Your name.” (Psalm 60:5/61:5).
[Glory, Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos....
(Refrain: “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, {Savior, save us.}”)

Second Antiphon:
“All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.” (Psalm 97:3/98:3).
“Let us worship at His footstool!” (Psalm 131:7/132:7).
“Yet God my King is from old, working salvation in the midst of the Earth.” (Psalm 73:12/74:12).
“I am exalted among the nations, I am exalted in the earth!” (Psalm 45;10/46:10).
[Glory, Now and ever, “Only begotten Son and immortal Word of God....”]
(Refrain: “O Son of God, who are risen from the dead, [save us who sing to You, Alleluia!]”)

27. It is understood that one of the Priests, afterwards, carries the Holy Cross around to all the men and women in attendance so that they may venerate it and receive flowers, as is customary, from his hands. This, most certainly, is done wherever there are several priests; but if not, the celebrating priest himself performs this duty, and the choirs sing the Idiomela which are in the Triodion until he has completed his task.

*(Printed Page 715)*
