=== LEAF p1061 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Epimanikia Concluded – Episkopos – Epitafios – Epitrachilion Part 1) (p. 1046 / TD-67)]

TD-67

throw Your adversaries (Exodus 15:6-7); now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («῾Η δεξιά Σου, Κύριε, δεδόξασται ἐν ἰσχύϊ· ἡ δεξιά Σου χείρ, Κύριε, ἔθραυσεν ἐχθρούς· καὶ τῷ πλήθει τῆς δόξης Σου συνέτριψας τοὺς ὑπεναντίους.» (᾿Εξόδου 15:6-7). When vesting with the left cuff, he prays: “Your hands have made me and fashioned me; enlighten me that I may learn Your commandments (Psalm 118 (119):73) now and ever, and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Αἱ χεῖρές Σου ἐποίησάν με καὶ ἔπλασάν με· συνέτισόν με καὶ μαθήσομαι τὰς ἐντολάς Σου (Ψαλμ. 118 (119):73). Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν.»)

EPISKOPOS (᾿Επίσκοπος, ὁ): See BISHOP.

EPITAFIOS (᾿Επιτάφιος, ὁ): A cloth icon enclosed within a large embroidered cloth and depicting the entombed Christ. See also KUVUKLION.

EPITRACHILION (᾿Επιτραχήλιον, τό) Slav. Epitraxil, Obvyjnik: An Orthodox liturgical vestment derived from the two Greek words for the neck (trachos) and upon (epi) and in that sense is the equivalent of the Western STOLE, the chief difference being that the Epitrachilion is always joined down the middle, normally by a series of ornamental studs. It is also broader then the Western Stole. It is the characteristic priestly vestment, worn only by bishops and priests. A priest should not celebrate any service unless he is wearing it. (AE)

    When vesting with the Epitrachilion, the Priest prays: “Blessed is God Who pours His grace upon His Priests, as ointment upon the head, which runs down over the beard, the beard of Aaron, runs down to the hem of his garment (Psalm 132 (133):2); now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen. («Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, ὁ ἐκχέων τὴν χάριν αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοὺς ἱερεῖς αὐτοῦ· ὡς μύρον ἐπὶ κεφαλῆς, τὸ καταβαῖνον ἐπὶ πώγωνα, τὸν πώγωνα τοῦ ᾿Ααρών, τὸ καταβαῖνον ἐπὶ τὴν ᾤαν τοῦ ἐνδύματος αὐτοῦ» Ψαλμ. 132 (133):2· Πάντοτε νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν.»)

*(Printed Page TD-67)*

=== LEAF p1062 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Epitrachilion Concluded – Equal of the Apostles – Etisis – Evangelion Part 1) (p. 1047 / TD-68)]

TD-68

It could be considered as essentially the ORARION of the DEACON, adapted for use by priests and bishops. It is worn around the neck with the two ends hanging down equally in front (more or less to the ankle) and with the two adjacent sides sewn or buttoned up together in the center, leaving enough space at the top through which to place the head. In practice it is never unfastened. It is usually made of brocade with seven embroidered or appliquéd crosses, one at the back of the neck and three down each side. (modified from wikipedia free encylopedia http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epitrachelion)

    The priest wears the epitrachilion whenever he is serving as a priest (as opposed to simply attending a service). For some services, e.g. Vespers or Matins, he wears the epitrachilion by itself. When he is fully vested for the Divine Liturgy, he wears the epitrachilion over the STICHARION and under the ZONI and the FELONION.

    If a priest is simply attending a service, he wears no vestments, but will put on his epitrachilion (and often his EPIMANIKIA) before receiving communion. (Retrieved with modification from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epitrachelion).

*EQUAL OF THE APOSTLES (ἰσαπόστολος): A saint who has been elevated by the Church to the rank and stature of the Apostles: e.g. Mary Magdalene, 22 July.

ETISIS (αἴτησις, ἡ): A petition or request addressed to God by the clergy in a litany of petitions.

EVANGELION (Εὐαγγέλιον, τό) Slav. Evangelie: The Evangelion is the Book containing the Gospels written by the four Evangelists and disciples of Christ Matthew, Mark, Luke and John (Thus, the Evangelion is sometimes called the Tetravangelion.) This book, decorated with icons of the Evangelists, is always kept on the altar table usually enclosed in a gilded metal case as tradition prohibited the use of books bound in animal skins laying on the altar table. The book is organized for liturgical use by the excerpts or pericopes (Lit. ‘cuttings around’) included in the book and assigned to each date and

*(Printed Page TD-68)*

=== LEAF p1063 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Evangelion Concluded – Evlogitaria – Evlogitos – Evresis Part 1) (p. 1048 / TD-69)]

TD-69

feast in the church calendar.

EVLOGITARIA (Εὐλογητάρια, τά) Slav. neporovchnyi: See BENEDICTIONS.

EVLOGITOS (Εὐλογητός): Used as an abbreviation for the complete opening prayer of many services. This prayer text line is as follows: “Blessed is our God always, now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.” («Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν πάντοτε, νῦν, καὶ ἀεί, καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν.») This prayer is used at the beginning of VESPERS, the MESONYKTIKON of Sunday and, without any concurring feast, during the period of the MOVABLE FEASTS of the Triodion and Pentikostarion if the feast coincides with a Feast of the Mother of God or a celebrated Saint. In small Vespers after the prayer of the 9th Hour a dismissal prayer is not done because at this point the VESPERS begins without the Evlogitos. The prayer is also done at Sunday MATINS and every other service except for a) The Divine Liturgy b) The Service of Holy Baptism and c) The Service of Holy Matrimony. In the latter three cases, the opening prayer is “Blessed is the kingdom of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.” («Εὐλογημένη ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ Πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ Υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ῾Αγίου Πνεύματος, νῦν καὶ ἀεί, καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν.») At VESPERS and MATINS during bright or renewal week, as well as the APODOSIS or LEAVE-TAKING (᾿Απόδοσις) of Pascha (Easter) and also prior to each daily read EXAPSALMOS the opening prayer is “Glory to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided Trinity, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.” («Δόξα τῇ ῾Αγίᾳ καὶ ῾Ομοουσίῳ καὶ ζωοποιῷ καὶ ἀδιαιρέτῳ Τριάδι· πάντοτε, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν») [See our translation of the Protheoria pgs. 4-5 and the Typikon pg. 4; also the Synekdimos pg. 246.] Note that the service of the morning prayer or ORTHROS begins immediately following the dismissal of the MIDNIGHT SERVICE or MESONYKTIKON (Μεσονυκτικόν).

EVRESIS (Εὕρεσις, ἡ): The finding or recovery, usually of the

*(Printed Page TD-69)*

=== LEAF p1064 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Evresis Concluded – Exapostilarion – Exapsalmos – Exapteryga – Exclamation Part 1) (p. 1049 / TD-70)]

TD-70

remains or relics of Saints or Martyrs. This may include the first or several findings.

*EXAPOSTILARION, pl. EXAPOSTILARIA (ἐξαποστειλάριον, τό· ἐξαποστειλάρια, τά) Slav. Svetilen. Lit. Hymn of Light: In Greek the word means “to send out”. These are one or two hymns chanted before the ENI (Hymns of Praise) toward the end of the Orthros (Morning Prayer). On regular Sundays, there are eleven Exapostilaria written by the son of Leo the Wise, Constantine Porphyrogenitos [912-959]. Each of these Esapostilaria corresponds to one of the eleven Resurrection Gospels whose general theme is the Resurrection and the events surrounding it. (AE)

    On major feasts, the Exapostilarion refers to the sacred event or sacred personage celebrated on that particular feast day. (From APL)

    In summary, there are three types of Exapostilaria: (1) Resurrectional, which follow the cycle of 11 resurrectional Gospel readings and Gospel stichira; (2) Festal, which pertain to the feast being celebrated; and (3) Trinitarian, which are sung at certain Lenten services in honor of the Holy Trinity.

EXAPSALMOS (῾Εξάψαλμος, ὁ) Alternate spelling–Hexapsalmos. Slav. Shestopsalmie: Lit. the Six Psalms (Psalms 3, 37, 62, 87, 102, and 142). This group of Psalms is read near the beginning of the Morning Prayer or MATINS (ORTHROS).

EXAPTERYGA (῾Εξαπτέρυγα, τά): The so-called ‘fans’ representing an order of angels and in Greek meaning literally ‘six-winged.’ These ‘fans’ are metallic disks carried on poles by acolytes during liturgical processions. These poles normally stand in a containing box behind the altar table on either side of a central pole holding the cross. The fan in Greek, has also been called a RIPIDION (ριπίδιον, τό) and in Latin, a flabellum.

EXCLAMATION (᾿Εκφώνησις, ἡ) Slav. Vozglas. See also EKPHONISIS.

*(Printed Page TD-70)*

=== LEAF p1065 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Exclamation Concluded – Exeretos – Exigisis – Exigitis – Exigitikos – Exorason – Fast – Feasts of the Lord Part 1) (p. 1050 / TD-71)]

TD-71

A prayer chanted aloud in a declamatory style by a priest or bishop at the conclusion of a longer prayer said in a softer voice.

EXERETOS (᾿Εξαιρέτως): ‘Especially’ or ‘above all.’ This is a common abbreviation for a longer prayer in the Divine Liturgy which is as follows: “Especially our most holy, blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary.” («᾿Εξαιρέτως τῆς παναγίας, ἀχράντου, ὑπερευλογημένης, ἐνδόξου, Δεσποίνης ἡμῶν Θεοτόκου, καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας.») In the Divine Liturgy, it is immediately followed by the singing of a hymn type called the Magnificat (Μεγαλυνάριον.) The most commonly used Megalynarion is the “It is truly fitting to call you blessed...” («῎Αξιόν ἐστιν ὡς ἀληθῶς...») This hymn may be replaced by another magnificat proper to the feast or Saint of the day as instructed in the Pretheory of the Typikon. These hymns are also listed in a collection located at the end of the Handbook of the Church Reader or Holy Services of Vespers, Matins and Divine Liturgy, Thirteenth edition, 1992, Athens, Greece published by the Apostoliki Diaconia of the Church of Greece.

EXIGISIS (᾿Εξήγησις, ἡ): Commentary, interpretation, explanation. Alternate spelling: Exegesis.

EXIGITIS (᾿Εξηγητής, ὁ): Interpreter. Alternate spelling: Exegetis.

EXIGITIKOS, -I, -ON: (᾿Εξηγητικός, -ή, -όν): Explanatory. Alternate spelling: Exegetikos, -i, -on.

EXORASON: See VESTMENTS.

FAST (νηστεία, ἡ): Abstaining from certain foods. Also, the period of time during which one abstains from certain foods. See also ABSTINENCE.

*FEASTS OF THE LORD (Δεσποτικαὶ ἑορταί):

1. The Elevation of the Holy Cross (14 September).
2. The Nativity of The Lord (25 December).
3. The Epiphany of The Lord (6 January).
4. The Presentation of The Lord in the Temple (2 February) is regarded as both a Feast of The Lord and of the Theotokos.

*(Printed Page TD-71)*

=== LEAF p1066 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Feasts of the Lord Concluded – Feasts of the Theotokos – Felonion Part 1) (p. 1051 / TD-72)]

TD-72

regarded as both a Feast of The Lord and of the Theotokos.
5. Palm Sunday (one week before Easter).
6. Pascha (Πάσχα) (Easter).
7. The Ascension of the Lord (40 days after Easter).
8. Pentecost (50 days after Pascha (Easter)).
9. The Transfiguration of the Lord (6 August).

*FEASTS OF THE THEOTOKOS (Θεομητορικαὶ ἑορταί):

1. The Nativity of the Theotokos (8 September).
2. The Presentation of the Theotokos in the Temple (21 November).
3. The Presentation of the Lord in the Temple (2 February). Regarded as both a Feast of the Theotokos and of the Lord.
4. The Annunciation of the Theotokos (25 March).
5. The Dormition of the Theotokos (15 August).

FELONION, -A (Φελόνιον, τό· pl. Φελόνια, τά): See also VESTMENTS. Today the Felonion is a liturgical vestment worn by a priest in the Orthodox Church. It is worn over the priest’s other vestments and is similar to the chasuble used in the Roman Catholic Church. The Felonion is an ornate circular garment with a opening in the center for the wearer’s head. When worn, it reaches to the wearer’s wrists in front, so that if the wearer holds both arms straight out, the Felonion forms a semi-circle when viewed from the front or the back. In its present form, the front is largely cut away (from about the waist down) to facilitate the movement of the priest’s hands. The rubrics may direct that the priest is to ‘lower the Felonion’, that is to let it fall over his hands at the moment of the Dismissal, indicating that the service is finished. Russian felonia often have a row of buttons across the chest so that the front of the vestment can be raised or lowered. The Felonion is a descendant of a first-century paenula (a garment worn as a coat by both sexes.) (Modification of AE)

    There are two main styles of Felonion. Greek Felonia are tailored to fit over the shoulders, while Russian Felonia have a high, stiffened collar that covers the back of the head.

    There is also a shortened type of Felonion that is worn by a

*(Printed Page TD-72)*

=== LEAF p1067 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Felonion Concluded – Festal Precedence – Finding – Forefeast – Fotagogikon – Gerontika Part 1) (p. 1052 / TD-73)]

TD-73

reader at his tonsuring by a bishop (http://www.svots.edu/Three-Hierarchs Chapel/2004-1005-patterson/pages/1200_JPG.htm).

    When vesting with the Felonion, the priest prays: “May Your priests, Lord, be clothed in righteousness, and Your faithful ones rejoice (Psalm 131 (132):9); now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («Οἱ ἱερεῖς Σου, Κύριε, ἐνδύσονται δικαιοσύνην, καὶ οἱ ὅσιοί Σου ἀγαλλιάσει ἀγαλλιάσονται (Ψαλμ. 131 (132):9). Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν.»)

    A bishop who wishes to serve a Divine Liturgy as a priest (i.e., without the special rites and prayers of the Hierarchical Divine Liturgy) may vest in a Felonion instead of his SAKKOS, but with the small OMOPHORION around his neck. (From “http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phelonion.”)

*FESTAL PRECEDENCE: When two feasts are celebrated together, one takes precedence over the other because of its higher rank (e.g., a Lord’s Feast takes precedence over a Saint’s Feast). This precedence is reflected in the ordering of the hymnology of these services. The hymns of the service of the dominant feast precede the hymns of the less dominant feast within each liturgical section (e.g. the Praises or the Apolytikia at the Small Entrance of the Divine Liturgy).

*FINDING (εὕρεσις, ἡ) of a saint’s remains or of a relic. The recovery of the lost remains of a saint or a relic for the first time or several times: e.g., the First and Second Finding of the Venerable head of John the Forerunner, 24 February.

FOREFEAST (S) (Προεόρτια, τά) Slav. predpravzdnestvo: See PROEORTIA or PRE-FEAST.

FOTAGOGIKON (Φωταγωγικόν, τό, pl. Φωταγωγικά, τά): Lit. illuminating. A hymn or group of hymns sung in place of the exapostilaria in the Matins (Orthros) of the fasting days of Great Lent. They are located at the end of the PARAKLITIKI.

GERONTIKA (Γεροντικά, τά): A Greek word naming those

*(Printed Page TD-73)*

=== LEAF p1068 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Gerontika Concluded – Gospels, Book of the – Great Archdeacon – Great Archimandrite – Great Chancellor – Great Dean – Great Ecclesiarch – Great Ektenis – Great Entrance Part 1) (p. 1053 / TD-74)]

TD-74

parts of the office which are traditionally read by the Superior or Elder (Γέρος, or Γέροντας). When the Superior is absent, those parts are read by the senior monk present.

    A visiting priest or important visitor is often asked to read the Gerontika. At festal Matins, the Gerontika include the Six Psalms, Psalm 50 and the concluding Prayer of the First Hour. (Modified from AE)

GOSPELS, BOOK OF THE (Εὐαγγέλιον, τό) See EVANGELION.

GREAT ARCHDEACON (Μέγας ᾿Αρχιδιάκονος, ὁ): The title of the senior DEACON serving in the Patriarchal Church.

GREAT ARCHIMANDRITE (Μέγας ᾿Αρχιμανδρίτης, ὁ): The title of the senior ARCHIMANDRITE serving in the Patriarchal Church.

GREAT CHANCELLOR (Μέγας Πρωτοσύγκελλος, ὁ): See MEGAS PROTOSYNGELLOS.

GREAT DEAN (Μέγας Πριμικήριος, ὁ): See MEGAS PRIMIKYRIOS.

GREAT ECCLESIARCH (Μέγας ᾿Εκκλησιάρχης, ὁ): He is understood to be the SACRISTAN, especially of a monastery such as that of the Great Church of Agia Sophia in Constantinople.

*GREAT EKTENIS (Μεγάλη ᾿Εκτενής, ἡ): Lit. from ektino (ἐκτείνω), ‘to spread out’.

    A long series of petitions recited by the priest or deacon at the beginning of the Divine Liturgy and in other services. The choir or chanter responds to each petition with “Lord, have mercy” («Κύριε, ἐλέησον.»)

*GREAT ENTRANCE (Μεγάλη Εἴσοδος, ἡ): An offertory procession in which the clergy, preceded by ACOLYTES, take up the bread and wine prepared for the Holy Eucharist on the PATEN or DISKARION

*(Printed Page TD-74)*

=== LEAF p1069 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Great Entrance Concluded – Great Ochtoichos – Great Protosyngellos – Great Synapti – Hades – Heirmologic – Hexapsalmos – Hierarch – Holy Altar) (p. 1054 / TD-75)]

TD-75

(δισκάριον) or ‘small tray’ and in the chalice—both covered with veils—from the table of the PROTHESIS. They exit the SANCTUARY through the north door, moving to the center of the SOLEAS, where they pause to recite certain commemorative prayers. They re-enter the Sanctuary through the central door, the BEAUTIFUL GATE, and lay the paten and the chalice upon the HOLY TABLE or ALTAR. This procession takes place during the singing of the Cherubic Hymn in the Divine Liturgy. When a bishop is officiating, the movement and the prayers of the procession vary to some degree in length and content.

GREAT OCHTOICHOS (Μεγάλη ᾿Οκτώηχος, ἡ): See PARAKLITIKI.

GREAT PROTOSYNGELLOS (Μέγας Πρωτοσύγκελλος, ὁ): The GREAT CHANCELLOR. The Byzantine ecclesiastical official charged with officiating in rites in the Patriarch’s absence.

*GREAT SYNAPTI (Μεγάλη Συναπτή, ἡ): Lit. from the Greek verb ‘sinapto’ (συνάπτω), ‘I gather together’ or ‘I touch’: Essentially the same as the GREAT EKTENIS, The Great Synapti, however, may appear within a Special Service (e.g., the Kneeling Service in Appendix A of Bogdanos’ The Byzantine Liturgy: Hymnology and Order) with some of its petitions referring to that particular Special Service and its liturgical function and aim.

HADES (῞Αδης, ὁ) Slav. Ad): The underworld below or hell. Lit. The term was used in ancient Greece for the underworld where souls reside after death.

*HEIRMOLOGIC (Alternate Phonetic Spelling—Irmologic): See MODE.

HEXAPSALMOS See EXAPSALMOS.

HIERARCH (῾Ιεράρχης, ὁ): See BISHOP.

*HOLY ALTAR. See SANCTUARY. It is also known by the terms: AGION VIMA, ALTAR, HOLY ALTAR, IERON VIMA, SANCTUARY, or VIMA.

*(Printed Page TD-75)*

=== LEAF p1070 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Holy Chrism – Holy Eucharist – Holy Myrrh – Holy Sanctuary – Holy Table – Horologion – Hours – Hymn) (p. 1055 / TD-76)]

TD-76

HOLY CHRISM: See CHRISM.

*HOLY EUCHARIST (Θεία Εὐχαριστία, ἡ): Instituted by Christ Himself at the Last Supper, the Holy Eucharist is the central and most important sacramental act in the life of the Church. It is celebrated in the Divine Liturgy as its central event and is synonymous with it. During the Holy Eucharist, the bread and wine are changed by the power of the Holy Spirit into the Body and Blood of Christ. The faithful receive the consecrated elements through communion and thus become one with Christ. As sacrament, the Holy Eucharist effects the most perfect union between God and man. At the same time, it unites the communicants with one another as members of Christ’s Body, the Church. The faithful offer thanks (eucharist or ‘thanksgiving’) to God for His many blessings and for the salvation that He has wrought for them, especially through His ministry on earth, His death and resurrection.

HOLY MYRRH (῞Αγιον μῦρον, τό): See CHRISM.

HOLY SANCTUARY: See SANCTUARY. It is also known by the terms: AGION VIMA, ALTAR, HOLY ALTAR, IERON VIMA, SANCTUARY, or VIMA.

*HOLY TABLE (῾Αγία Τράπεζα, ἡ), Slav. Prestol: See ALTAR.

HOROLOGION: Alternate spelling of OROLOGION.

HOURS (῞Ωρα, ἡ, pl. ῏Ωραι, αἱ) Slav. Chasy: Though predominantly done in Holy Monasteries, the Hours are services regularly celebrated in parish churches in cities and towns. The 1st, 3rd, and 6th Hours are done before the Matins (Orthros) service, and the 9th Hour before Vespers. The text of these Hours is found in the book The Mega Orologion, before the Service of Matins (Orthros). A special distinct group called the Great (or Royal) Hours is performed on the Eve of Christmas, the Eve of Epiphany, and on Friday of Holy Week. Their texts can be found in the services of these feasts.

HYMN: See TROPARION.

*(Printed Page TD-76)*
