=== LEAF p1091 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Matins Part 1) (p. 1076 / TD-97)]

TD-97

MATINS (ὄρθρος, ὁ). Slav. Utrenya: Matins is a western term which, in Greek Orthodox Churches, is known by the Greek term ORTHROS meaning "early dawn" or "daybreak." A part of the daily cycle of services, it is the last of the four night offices, which include Vespers, Compline, Midnight Office and Matins. In traditional monasteries it is celebrated daily so as to end at sunrise.

    Matins is the longest and most complex of the daily cycle of services. It is normally celebrated in the early morning, sometimes preceded by the Midnight Office, and usually followed by the First Hour. On Great Feasts it is celebrated as part of an All-Night Vigil on the evening before, combined with Vespers and the First Hour. In the Greek parish tradition, Matins is normally served just before the beginning of the Divine Liturgy on Sunday morning. In the Slavic tradition, an All-Night Vigil is served every Sunday (commencing on Saturday evening).

    The fixed portion of the service is composed primarily of psalms and litanies. The variable parts of Matins are composed primarily of HYMNS and CANONS from the PARAKLITIKI (OKTOICHOS), a book containing a cycle of hymns for each of eight modes for each day of the week, covering eight weeks), and from the MINEA, i.e., 12 books containing hymns for each of the 12 months of the year. During Great Lent, some of the portions from the Oktoichos and the Minea are replaced by hymns from the book called the TRIODION and during the Paschal Season with material from the book called the PENTIKOSTARION. On Sundays there are also Gospel readings and hymns from the eleven-part cycle of Resurrectional Gospels.

    For a more detailed and accurate presentation of the order of the Matins Service for all liturgical occasions in the ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR, see the following sources:

    1. The present Typikon by G. Violakis:

        a. The Protheoria for the general principles guiding the order of services.

*(Printed Page TD-97)*

=== LEAF p1092 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Matins Concluded Part 2 – Mega Kiropigion – Mega Synodikon – Megali Oktoichos – Megali Synapti – Megalynarion Part 1) (p. 1077 / TD-98)]

TD-98

        b. The specific dates and their situations presented in each immovable and movable feast.

    2. The main liturgical books: The Paraklitiki, The 12 Minea, The Triodion, and the Pentikostarion.

    3. The Ieratikon.

    4. The Engolpion tu Anagnostu.

    5. The Megas ke Ieros Synekdimos.

MEGA KIROPIGION (μέγα κηροπήγιον, τό): A large candle holder or stand. These are usually found on the SOLEAS.

MEGA SYNODIKON (Μέγα Συνοδικὸν, τό): A Synodikon is defined as a written and eventually read proclamation in churches summarizing the decisions of a synod of bishops. With the appelation of "Mega" or "Great" it usually refers to the liturgical text used in the Eastern Orthodox Church on the Feast of Orthodoxy and composed c. 843 by Patriarch Methodios I. (Livingstone, E. A.)

*MEGALI OKTOICHOS (Μεγάλη Ὀκτώηχος): Same as PARAKLITIKI.

MEGALI SYNAPTI (Μεγάλη Συναπτή, ἡ): An extended litany of petitions and responses.

*MEGALYNARION (Μεγαλυνάριον, τό) Slav. Velichanie: A hymn praising or magnifying the Theotokos, sung after "Se Ymnumen" (Σὲ ὑμνοῦμεν) in the Divine Liturgy. The Megalynarion is often the initial hymn or irmos (εἱρμός) of the Ninth Ode or canticle of the Canon that is chanted in the Orthros of the day, e.g., the Fotizu, Fotizu, the initial hymn of the Ninth Ode of the Easter Canon. At other times, the Megalynarion is an independent hymn, such as "Epi Si Cheri" («᾿Επὶ σοὶ χαίρει»), sung in St. Basil's Divine Liturgy. The Megalynarion most commonly sung in the Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom is Axion Estin («῎Αξιόν ἐστίν»).

*(Printed Page TD-98)*

=== LEAF p1093 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Megalynarion Concluded Part 2 – Megalynarion at the Diptycha – Megas Archidiakonos – Megas Archimandritis – Megas Ekklisiarchis – Megas Primikirios – Megas Protosyngkellos) (p. 1078 / TD-99)]

TD-99

    Moreover, the Megalynarion contains either at the beginning or the end the word 'megalynomen' (μεγαλύνομεν).

*MEGALYNARION AT THE DIPTYCHA (Μεγαλυνάριον εἰς τὰ Δίπτυχα): A Megalynarion dedicated to a specific saint or sacred object, sung in addition to the Megalynarion of the Divine Liturgy. It is sung by the choir immediately before its response "Ke panton ke pason" («Καὶ πάντων καὶ πασῶν»). For the order, see the Ieratikon, ed. Apostoliki Diakonia (Athens, 1977 and 1987), p. 182. The Egkolpion tu Anagnostu (Manual of the Church Reader), ed. Apostoliki Diakonia (Athens, ca. 1970), p. 83, proposes a less common yet recent practice: that the Megalynarion at the Diptycha be sung immediately before the priest's petition "Remember also, Lord, those whom each of us calls to mind and all Your people." («Καὶ ὧν ἕκαστος κατὰ διάνοιαν ἔχει καὶ πάντων καὶ πασῶν.») Violakis' Typikon refers to only two such Megalynaria: for St. Basil, 1 January (pp. 137-138, ¶ 3); and for the Zoodochos Pigi, Friday following Easter Sunday (pp. 374-375, ¶ 8). The Egkolpion tu Anagnostu, on the other hand, contains several of them, possibly written after the publication of the Typikon (1888).

MEGAS ARCHIDIAKONOS (Μέγας ᾿Αρχιδιάκονος, ὁ): The GREAT ARCHDEACON.

MEGAS ARCHIMANDRITIS (Μέγας ᾿Αρχιμανδρίτης, ὁ): The GREAT ARCHIMANDRITE.

MEGAS EKKLISIARCHIS (Μέγας ᾿Εκκλησιάρχης, ὁ): The GREAT ECCLESIARCH. This was a church official, particularly in monasteries, whose function was most similar to the SACRISTAN in the western church.

MEGAS PRIMIKIRIOS (Μέγας Πριμικήριος, ὁ): GREAT DEAN.

MEGAS PROTOSYNGKELLOS (Μέγας Πρωτοσύγκελλος, ὁ): GREAT CHANCELLOR. A bishop charged with officiating in services in the absence of the Patriarch.

*(Printed Page TD-99)*

=== LEAF p1094 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Megas Sakellarios – Megas Synaxaristis – Mesonyktikon – Mesopentikosti – Metania – Metastasis – Metheorta Part 1) (p. 1079 / TD-100)]

TD-100

MEGAS SAKELLARIOS (Μέγας Σακελλάριος, ὁ): The Byzantine official in charge of the imperial or patriarchal treasury where records of the imperial monasteries and their properties were kept.

MEGAS SYNAXARISTIS (Μέγας Συναξαριστής, ὁ): An extensive history of the lives of the saints in 12 volumes, organized into collections arranged by the month in which the saint is celebrated. A brief summary of these biographies is presented in a service book of the church called the SYNAXARION. Similar brief summaries are also included in the 12 books of the MINEA.

MESONYKTIKON (Μεσονυκτικόν, τό) Slav. Polunoschnitsa: The Midnight Service. A part of the Daily Cycle of services in the Orthodox Church.

*MESOPENTIKOSTI (Μεσοπεντηκοστή, ἡ) Slav. Prepolovenie Pjatidesjatnicy: The midpoint in the fifty-days span between Easter Sunday and Pentecost Sunday. The Feast of Mesopentikosti or Midpentecost falls on the Wednesday after the Sunday of the Paralytic (the Fourth Sunday of Easter).

METANIA (μετάνοια, ἡ): The act of repentance. The term also can mean a low bow in which the right hand touches the ground. Slav. poklon. Moreover it also may mean a full PROSTRATION done in penitence or obeisance.

METASTASIS (μετάστασις, ἡ): See TRANSLATION (μετάστασις, ἡ) to heaven.

*METHEORTA (μεθέορτα, τά), METHEORTIA (μεθεόρτια, τά) Slav. Poprazdnstvo: The Greek plural of POST-FEAST or AFTERFEAST: This is a period of celebration appended to one of the Great Feasts celebrated by the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic Churches of the Byzantine Rite. This is the period immediately after a feast—lasting from one to seven days—during which the feast continues to be commemorated. The feast is reflected in the hymns and the prayers of this period. The period is approximately equivalent to what in the West is called the octave of the feast. The last day of this period is

*(Printed Page TD-100)*

=== LEAF p1095 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Metheorta Concluded Part 2 – Metheorton – Midnight Service – Mild Chromatic Scale – Mineon, Minea – Minologion – Miracle-Worker – Mitra) (p. 1080 / TD-101)]

TD-101

called the APODOSIS, i.e., the day of expiration of the feast.

*METHEORTON (μεθέορτον): The adjective characterizing a hymn as belonging to the period of a feast's Metheorta or Metheortia: e.g., Metheorton Apolytikion, Metheorton Kontakion, etc. See also POST-FEAST.

MIDNIGHT SERVICE: See MESONYKTIKON.

*MILD CHROMATIC SCALE (μαλακὴ χρωματικὴ κλῖμαξ). Same as Soft Chromatic Scale. See Introduction.

*MINEON, pl. MINEA (Μηναῖον, τὸ· Μηναῖα, τά) Slav. Mineya:
    From the Greek word for 'month'. The Minea are books containing the services for each day of the month of the calendar year. There are thus twelve volumes of the Mineon. For places without a full set of Minea there exists in both Greek and Slav. a volume containing general offices for each category of saint called the General Menaion. The contents of the Greek and Slavonic General Menaia are not identical, the Slavonic containing more offices, as well as texts for a full Vigil for each category of saint, and also for the Lord and the Mother of God. (modified from AE)

*MINOLOGION (Μηνολόγιον, τό): A daily calendar of the IMMOVABLE FEASTS of the Greek Orthodox (Byzantine) Church listed in a monthly sequence.

*MIRACLE-WORKER (θαυματουργός, ὁ): A saint who performed miracles (usually of healing) during or even after his earthly life: e.g., St. Charalambos, 10 February.

MITRA (μίτρα, ἡ) Slav. Venec: The Byzantine Miter or Crown (functionally similar to the Western Mitre) is the ornate head covering worn by a Bishop. It typically is decorated with icons of Christ and the Evangelists as well as precious stones and bears a cross on top. It symbolizes the glory of the Lord and the highest ecclesiastical authority which has been conferred upon the Bishop at his ordination.

*(Printed Page TD-101)*

=== LEAF p1096 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Mode / Tone Part 1: Irmologic, Sticheraric, Papadic Styles; Octoichos Origins) (p. 1081 / TD-102)]

TD-102

*MODE (ἦχος, ὁ) Slav. Glas, glasy. Same as TONE: A mode is identified by (a) A particular scale of musical intervals and (b) A group of characteristic melodic formulae (Slav. popevki). A mode also has its own melodic range (ἔκτασις), intonation (ἀπήχημα), base tone or ison (βάσις, ἶσον), dominant tones (δεσπόζοντες φθόγγοι), mode and cadence note signatures (μαρτυρίαι), and modulants (φθοραί). The melodies of a particular mode may be written in three diferent styles or kinds:

    (1.) Irmologic (εἱρμολογικόν): The melodies are syllabic in character; that is, nearly each syllable of the text is sung to a different interval, lasting one and sometimes two beats. They are chanted in a rapid tempo, allegretto to vivace, often in cut-time. A good example of the Irmologic style is that used for the eight Resurrection Dismissal Hymns (APOLYTIKIA) sung at the SMALL ENTRANCE in the DIVINE LITURGY.

    (2.) Sticheraric (στιχηραρικόν): the melodies are more ornate than in the Irmologic style; each syllable is given the average of two intervals and one to three beats. The tempo ranges generally from allegretto to andante. The sticheraric style is found in hymn types such as the Kekragaria in Vespers, Pasapnoaria in Orthros, and some of the Megalynaria in the Divine Liturgy.

    (3.) Papadic (παπαδικόν): The melodies are highly ornate, elaborate and extended—that is, melismatic. The tempo tends to be slow, although some ornate passages or melodies may be sung at a faster tempo. The Cherubic hymns and Communion hymns are prime examples of this style. The style or "kind" within each mode affects and alters to some extent all the musical elements mentioned in the first paragraph above.

    The system of classifying Byzantine music and hymnology into eight tonal categories, known as Modes came to be applied to eight weekly cycles of hymns. As early as the 6th c., these hymns were compiled into a book known as the Octoichos, which was supposedly systematized and edited in the 8th century by St. John the Damascene.

*(Printed Page TD-102)*

=== LEAF p1097 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (The Cycle of Modes Part 2: Weekly Oktoechos Cycle, Paschal Sequence) (p. 1082 / TD-103)]

TD-103

The Cycle of Modes

    In Byzantine music, there are eight modes: First, Second, Third, Fourth, First Plagal, Second Plagal, Varys (Third Plagal), and Fourth Plagal. All the hymnology of the Byzantine Greek Orthodox Church is sung using one of the eight modes. The eight modes, in fact, serve as an overall structure within which the church has organized its daily services and their extensive hymnology. This structure can be seen in one of the most important liturgical books of the church, the PARAKLITIKI, also called the Megali Oktoichos (the Great Book of the Eight Modes).

    The PARAKLITIKI contains the appointed services and the hymnology for every day of the year. It is divided into eight sections or modal periods (περίοδοι τῶν ἤχων), each containing the services of one week, subdivided into its individual days from Sunday to Saturday. Each of the eight sections, or modal periods, is sung in one of the eight modes, moving progressively from Mode I to Mode IV Plagal. When the whole sequence of the eight modes has been gone through, a new one begins with Mode I, repeating itself as a cycle throughout the church year. This cycle of modes is initiated on each Sunday of Pascha (Easter) with Mode I, as is evident by the predominant use of Mode I in the Eni (Αἶνοι) or Hymns of Praise of the Easter Service sung in Mode I, before the Doxology in the Orthros. Through similar borrowings from the Paraklitiki in their services, the days in the week following Easter fall into the following modal pattern: Easter Monday—Mode II; Easter Tuesday—Mode III; Easter Wednesday—Mode IV; Easter Thursday—Mode I Plagal; Easter Friday—Mode II Plagal; Mode Varys (the Grave Mode) is omitted; Easter Saturday—Mode IV Plagal. The Second Sunday of Easter (Sunday of Thomas) returns to Mode I. From this point on, the modal pattern becomes weekly, the mode changing at the Vespers Service the night before each successive Sunday. Thus, the Third Sunday of Easter (Sunday of the Myrrh Bearers) moves to Mode II, and so on in the Sundays that follow, until Mode IV Plagal is completed. When Mode I is resumed, a new modal sequence begins, repeating itself cyclically until the Fifth Sunday of Lent of the following year. Palm Sunday,

*(Printed Page TD-103)*

=== LEAF p1098 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (The Cycle of Modes Concluded Part 3 – Movable Feast – Myrofori – Myrovlitis – Myrrh – Myrrh Bearers – Myrrh-Exuding – Mysteries Part 1) (p. 1083 / TD-104)]

TD-104

which has no particular mode assigned to it, breaks the current cycle of modes. The ensuing Easter Sunday initiates an entirely new cycle, beginning with Mode I.

*MOVABLE FEAST (κινητὴ ἑορτή, ἡ): A feast that is not fixed to any particular calendar date of the LITURGICAL YEAR. Movable feasts occur within the periods of the TRIODION and PENTIKOSTARION, which constitute the whole framework of movable feasts. This framework begins with the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee and ends with the Sunday of All Saints. Each movable feast has a fixed relationship to the Sunday of Pascha (Easter), which in the Gregorian Calendar may occur as early as April 4 and as late as May 8. The day on which a particular movable feast may be celebrated depends, therefore, on the date on which the Sunday of Pascha (Easter) falls each year. (For the earliest and latest possible dates of all the movable feasts, see p. 284 of Bogdanos' The Byzantine Liturgy: Hymnology and Order. For the dates of both the movable and imovable feasts falling on Sundays in a particular year, see Schedule of Sunday Modes and Movable Feasts (A.D. 1992-2099), in Appendix D of the above Bogdanos book.

MYROFORI (pl. μυροφόροι, αἱ): Myrrh bearers.

*MYROVLITIS (μυροβλήτης, ὁ): Myrrh-exuding. An epithet for a saint whose tomb has miraculously exuded a fragrant liquid: e.g., St. Demetrios, 26 October.

MYRRH (μῦρον, τό): See CHRISM.

*MYRRH BEARERS (μυροφόροι, αἱ): The women who brought perfumes and sweet spices to Christ's tomb to anoint His body. Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome, the mother of John the Evangelist.

*MYRRH-EXUDING (μυροβλήτης): An epithet of a saint whose tomb has miraculously exuded a fragrant liquid: e.g. St. Demetrios, 26 October.

*MYSTERIES (Μυστήρια, τά): The term Mysteries (or Holy Mys-

*(Printed Page TD-104)*

=== LEAF p1099 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Mysteries Concluded Part 2 – Naos – Narthex Part 1) (p. 1084 / TD-105)]

TD-105

teries—Ἅγια Μυστήρια) refers to dogmas or tenets as well as sacramental rites (or Sacraments) of the Christian faith that are beyond full human comprehension, embraced through faith rather than through pure reason and objective knowledge. A central Christian mystery is the Incarnation and its "process," wherein God takes on the nature of His creature, man, uniting divine and human nature in the person of Jesus Christ. Another key mystery is that of the Resurrection: God, the creator of existence, being beyond the limits of non-existence, transcends death and rises above it. Another profound mystery is the nature and the function of the sacraments in their binding of man to God. For instance, man cannot understand how two humble, earthbound elements, bread and wine, are transubstantiated by the Holy Spirit into Christ's very body and blood. Pointing to the bread and the wine at the Last Supper, Christ said "this is my body...this is my blood," thus Himself instituting for posterity the Sacrament of Holy Communion. Today, by taking Holy Communion, the believer becomes one with God, partaking of His divine essence. The Orthodox Church celebrates seven Sacraments: Baptism, Chrismation, Communion (the Eucharist), Ordination (holy orders), Confession (Penance), Holy Unction, and Marriage. These sacraments sanctify and consecrate man in his faith and unite him with God, from birth to the end of his days on this earth.

NAOS (ναός, ὁ): The church building or temple. The term has also been used to describe the largest section of the Greek Orthodox Church of today, the NAVE. See also EKKLISIA.

NARTHEX (νάρθηξ, ὁ) Slav. pritvor: The Orthodox House of Worship is divided into three distinct and separate areas, one of which is the Narthex. In the Church today, the Narthex is considered a vestibule (entry). In other words, it is the foyer that we enter before entering into the church proper (the NAVE). In Byzantine churches today, this space may be divided into two parts: An exonarthex which is the most western portion of the narthex and is the outer entrance to the building and on its eastern end bounds the esonarthex, which opens into the NAVE. The narthex is a place where the faithful offer material gifts for the work of the church, and prayers for both the living and

*(Printed Page TD-105)*

=== LEAF p1100 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Narthex Concluded Part 2 – Nave – Nekrosimon – Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed – Now and Ever) (p. 1085 / TD-106)]

TD-106

the dead as they light candles and reverence icons. In early Christianity, the Narthex provided the Church many a service. On Sundays, it was filled with catechumens (candidates for baptism) and penitents who would follow the Liturgy; the poor and the lame also might be present asking for alms. Church history also recounts many priests and hierarchs who would stand in the Narthex and block the entrance of the impious who had strayed from the Orthodox way.

    During the years of Turkish occupation in Greece and the years of Communist rule throughout Eastern Europe, the Narthex was often used for another purpose. Christian children would gather at nightfall to learn of the faith from the priest and, in some cases, to even learn to read and write. These secret schools, for years, took place in the sanctity of the Narthex. Today, as we offer material gifts for the work of the Church, light candles, and reverence icons, catechumens are no longer found in their traditional place. We may however find catechetical resources for those wish to learn more about their faith (i.e. books, tapes, icons, prayer ropes, prosforo seals, all in a kiosk). The poor and the lame who, following services, would, with out-stretched hand, ask for alms no longer are present. Instead, a container or tray is provided for the collection of donations that are then offered to an outreach ministry.

NAVE (ναός, ὁ): The architecture of the Orthodox Church of today is made up of three parts: the SANCTUARY, the NAVE and the NARTHEX (Vestibule). The Sanctuary of the Orthodox Church corresponds to the Holy of Holies of Solomon's Temple. The Holy of Holies was not used for daily worship and only the high priest could enter and then only once a year. The worship was held in the main part of the temple.

NEKROSIMON (Νεκρώσιμον, τό, pl. Νεκρώσιμα, τά): A hymn or a group of hymns, and services sung in commemoration of the dead.

NICENE-CONSTANTINOPOLITAN CREED: See CREED.

NOW AND EVER (Καὶ νῦν): See KE NYN.

*(Printed Page TD-106)*
