=== LEAF p661 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Translation of the Holy Mandylion (August 16, Concl. §§ 11–12); Sunday after the Dormition (Heading, §§ 13–14 Opening) (p. 646)]

646

11.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
᾿Απολυτίκιον Τὴν ἄχραντον Εἰκόνα σου, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος.    Εἰς
τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ ᾿Απολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ
Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος. Εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν δύο ἀναστάσιμα
Καθίσματα, καὶ μεθέορτον Καθορῶσαι ἀληθῶς (ζήτει εἰς τὴν ΙΣΤ΄)·
εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν αὖθις δύο ᾿Αναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον
μεθέορτον Ἐν χερσὶ τοῦ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς·    εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ
Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ
᾿Αναστάσιμος, καὶ ὁ τοῦ ἁγίου Μανδηλίου μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι
ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα Ἐδέσσης βασιλεὺς καὶ τῆς
ἑορτῆς Ὁ πάντιμος χορός· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ
᾿Αναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι
Πεποικιλμένη τῇ θείᾳ δόξῃ καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἐξαποστειλάριον, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Τῶν ᾿Αποστόλων ὁ δῆμος
ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄ Ὕμνοις
σου τὸ σεπτὸν (ζήτει τῷ ΙΣΤ΄), Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
12.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου.
Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, Τὴν ἄχραντον
εἰκόνα σου, Ἐν τῇ Γεννήσει, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Τὴν
ἐν πρεσβείαις ἀκοίμητον,    ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς
Κυριακῆς.    Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε.
Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

                Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὴν ἑορτήν.

13.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ
Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ
μεθέορτα δ΄,    Δόξα,    Ἡ τῶν οὐρανῶν ὑψηλοτέρα ὑπάρχουσα
(ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος,
Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.    Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ
ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἄσατε λαοί (ζήτει εἰς τὴν
Λιτήν), τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ καὶ
᾿Απόλυσις.

14.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ
Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον,
τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Ἐν τῇ Γεννήσει, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ.

*(Printed Page 646)*

=== LEAF p662 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Translation of the Holy Mandylion (August 16, Concl. §§ 11–12); Sunday after the Dormition (Heading, §§ 13–14 Opening) (p. 647)]

647

“It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Your most pure image,”
and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers,
then the Psalter and the Amomos. At the Kathismata of the First Stasis
[Stichologia]: two of the Resurrection and that of the Post-feast “Behold-
ing truly” (see the 16th); at the Second Stasis: two of the Resurrection and
the other one of the Post-feast “In the hands.” The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi,
the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon. Then the Canons of the
Resurrection and the Holy Veil with the Verse: “Glory to you, our God.”
After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma “The King of Edessa” and that of the Feast
“The all-honorable chorus”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of
the Resurrection and the Minologion of the day. The Katavasie “Adorned
in divine glory,” and the order of the Matins Gospel, then “More honor-
able.” The Resurrection Exapostilarion and that of the Feast “The commu-
nity of the Apostles” (once). At the Praises: the 4 of the Resurrection and
4 of the Post-feast “Hymns to your venerable body” (look for this in the
16th of this month); Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,”
Great Doxology and “Today salvation”.
12.    In the Liturgy are sung the Typika and Beatitudes of the Mode.
After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Resurrection, the Apolytikia
“Your most pure image,” “In giving birth,” of the Saint of the Church, and
the Kontakion “Neither the tomb nor death.” Apostolos and Gospel of the
Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise [the
Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.

                Sunday after the Feast.

13.    On Saturday evening, at Great Vespers, following the Introductory
Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Resurrection
Stichira and 4 of the Post-feast, Glory, “She who is higher than the
heavens” (see the Liti of the Feast), Now and ever the first Theotokion of
the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the
Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “Sing, O
people!” (seek in the Liti). The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, “In giving
birth” (once), and Dismissal.
14.    Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic
“It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “In giving birth,” and the
Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion (twice)
and that of the Feast (once), then the Psalter and the Amomos. At the
Kathismata: two of the Resurrection and one of the Post-feast in place of

*(Printed Page 647)*

=== LEAF p663 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Sunday after the Dormition (Concl. §§ 14–15); The Apodosis of the Feast (August 23, Heading, §§ 16–17, § 18 Opening) (p. 648)]

648

εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ
ἓν μεθέορτον ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ
τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς
Παρθένοι νεάνιδες·    ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα Ἐν χερσὶ τοῦ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς
(ζήτει τῇ ΙΖ΄)·    ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ ᾿Αναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ
Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Πεποικιλμένη τῇ θείᾳ δόξῃ καὶ ἅπασα
ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους, [Στιχηρὰ] ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄. Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν,
Καὶ νῦν,    Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον
σωτηρία.
15.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ
Κοντάκιον Τὴν ἐν πρεσβείαις,    ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς
Κυριακῆς.    Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε.
Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

                    Ἡ ᾿Απόδοσις.

16.    Τῇ ΚΓ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ ᾿Ακολουθία
ἀπαραλλάκτως κατὰ τὴν ἐν §§ 1, 2, 3, διάταξιν, ἐξαιρουμένων ἐν τῷ
Ἑσπερινῷ τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου καὶ τῶν ᾿Αναγνωσμάτων, ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, τῆς
Λιτῆς, τοῦ Πολυελέου, τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου καὶ τοῦ Μηνολογίου· ἐν δὲ τῇ
Λειτουργίᾳ, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς,
Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον.
17.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ᾿Απόδοσις ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ
τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς ς΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Θεαρχίῳ νεύματι.
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.    Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ
ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὅτε ἐξεδήμησας, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δὶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

18.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον
τῆς ἑορτῆς κτλ. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ ᾿Απολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν
Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα
καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή,
οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος

*(Printed Page 648)*

=== LEAF p664 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Sunday after the Dormition (Concl. §§ 14–15); The Apodosis of the Feast (August 23, Heading, §§ 16–17, § 18 Opening) (p. 649)]

649

each of the Theotokia. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the
Mode, and the Prokimenon. Then the Canons of the Resurrection and of the
Feast “O you young virgins.” After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma “In the
hands” (look in the 17th of this month); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion
and Ikos of the Resurrection and the Minologion. The Katavasie “Adorned
in divine glory,” and the order of the Matins Gospel, then “More honor-
able”; the Resurrection Exapostilarion and that of the Feast (once). At the
Praises: the 4 [Stichira] of the Resurrection and the 4 of the Post-feast,
Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and
“Today salvation.”
15.    In the Liturgy are sung the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and
4 hymns of the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast. After the Entrance, the
Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Saint of the Church,
and the Kontakion “Neither the tomb nor death.” Apostolos and Gospel of
the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise [the
Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light “ and Dismissal.

                    The Leave-taking.

16.    On the 23rd of this month the Leave-taking of the Feast takes place,
and the Service is sung according to the order described in Paragraphs 1, 2
and 3, except: for the Psalter and Readings in Vespers; and for the Liti, the
Polyeleos, the Gospel and the Minologion in Matins. In the Liturgy, we do
the Apostolos and Gospel of the Feast and the Communion Hymn “[I will
receive] the cup.”
17.    If the Leave-taking occurs on a Sunday, Saturday evening at Great
Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have
cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira and 6 of the Feast. Glory, Now and
ever, “By the royal command of God.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and
the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now
and ever, “When you departed from this life.” The Apolytikia: of the
Resurrection (once) and of the Feast (twice) and Dismissal.
18.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon the Liti and
the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “In giving
birth” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in
Vespers, then the Psalter and the Amomos. At the Kathismata: two of
Resurrection and one of the Feast in place of each of the Theotokia. The
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon.
Then the Canons of the Resurrection and the two of the Feast. After the 3rd

*(Printed Page 649)*

=== LEAF p665 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Apodosis of the Dormition (August 23, Concl. §§ 18–19); The Beheading of the Honorable Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John (August 29, §§ 1–2, § 3 Opening) (p. 650)]

650

καὶ οἱ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον
μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Ἐν τῇ Γεννήσει σου· ἀφ᾿
ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας,
αἱ Καταβασίαι Πεποικιλμένη καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων ὡς ἐν τῇ
ἑορτῇ, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς.
Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα, Τῇ
ἀθανάτῳ σου Κοιμήσει, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
19.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ ᾿Αντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς· εἰς τὸ
β΄ ᾿Αντίφωνον Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Τὴν ἐν
πρεσβείαις, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. [Σημ.
Μεταφραστοῦ· Αὐτὴ ἡ τάξις δὲν συμφωνεῖ μέ σελ. 36-37 § 42 τῆς
Προθεωρίας, ἡ ὁποία λέγει· Ἐν τῇ Κοιμήσει τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ ἐν τῇ
᾿Αποδόσει, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται πάντοτε τὰ τῆς
ἑορτῆς, ἐν οἵᾳ ἂν ἡμέρᾳ τύχῃ.] Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Αἱ γενεαὶ πᾶσαι
. . . Νενίκηνται τῆς φύσεως οἱ ὅροι. Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν
τὸ φῶς, ᾿Απόλυσις καὶ ᾿Απόδοσις.
       Μετὰ τὴν ᾿Απόδοσιν τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐπαναλαμβάνονται
αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας Μωσῆς, καὶ Κοντάκιον λέγεται
Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ Ἄννα.

Τῇ ΚΘ΄    Ἡ ᾿Αποτομὴ τῆς τιμίας κεφαλῆς τοῦ τιμίου,
ἐνδόξου, Προφήτου, Προδρόμου καὶ Βαπτιστοῦ Ἰωάννου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Προδρόμου ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν
Κυριακῆς, ἡ ᾿Ακολουθία ψάλλεται ὥς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν
Μηναίῳ.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου ς΄. Δόξα, Γενεθλίων τελουμένων,
Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ
Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ ᾿Αναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ
ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Πρόδρομε τοῦ Σωτῆρος, Καὶ νῦν,
᾿Ανύμφευτε Παρθένε, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ Μνήμη
δικαίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον Πάντα ὑπὲρ ἔννοιαν καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν,

*(Printed Page 650)*

=== LEAF p666 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Apodosis of the Dormition (August 23, Concl. §§ 18–19); The Beheading of the Honorable Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John (August 29, §§ 1–2, § 3 Opening) (p. 651)]

651

Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection and the Kathisma “In your
birth-giving”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast and the
Minologion of the day. The Katavasie “Adorned in divine glory,” and the
entire order of the Matins Gospel; then the 9th Ode with the Megalynaria
as on the Feast. The Resurrection Exapostilarion and that of the Feast
(twice). At the Praises: the 4 of the Resurrection and 4 of the Feast, Glory,
“At your deathless Dormition,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great
Doxology and “Today salvation.”
19.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast; at the 2nd Antiphon
“who is risen from the dead.” After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the
Resurrection, of the Feast, and the Kontakion “Neither the tomb nor
death.” The Apostolos and the Gospel of the Sunday. {Translator’s Note:
This does not conform with Paragraph 42 of the Protheoria, where it states:
“On the Dormition of the Theotokos and the Apodosis, the Apostolos and
Gospel are always those of the Feast, regardless of the day.”} At
“Especially,” “All generations . . . The laws of nature are overcome,”
Communion Hymn “[I shall receive] the cup,” “We have seen the [true]
light” and Dismissal.
       After the Leave-taking of the Feast, we resume the Katavasie
“Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross” and the Kontakion “Joachim
and Anna.”

The 29th    The Beheading of the Honorable and Glorious
Prophet and Forerunner John the Baptist.

1.    If the Feast of the Forerunner occurs on any other day except
Sunday, the Service is sung as prescribed in the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 of the Forerunner. Glory, “While
the birthday,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance,
“O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha:
the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, “O Forerunner of the Savior,” Now and
ever, “O Unwedded Virgin.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, “The
memory of the just,” and the Theotokion “Your mysteries are above
human understanding,” and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of

*(Printed Page 651)*

=== LEAF p667 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Beheading of the Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John (August 29, Concl. §§ 3–4, Fasting Rubric, § 5 Saturday Concurrence) (p. 652)]

652

Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ ᾿Απολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν
Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα
κατὰ σειράν, καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τοῦ Προδρόμου μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων· ἐν
δὲ τῇ γ΄ Στιχολογίᾳ, Κάθισμα τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ
Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Κανόνες ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Προδρόμου
Νῦν ἐπέφανεν ἡμῖν καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας,
καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν
τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον, τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ
τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου
δ΄, Δόξα, Πάλιν Ἡρωδιὰς μαίνεται, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη,
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Προδρόμου. Μετὰ
τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ
τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ Ἄννα, ᾿Απόστολος
καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

      Σημ. Τὴν ἡμέραν ταύτην παρελάβομεν νηστεύειν τοὺς
εὐσεβεῖς, διὰ τὸν φόνον τοῦ μείζονος πάντων τῶν Προφητῶν Ἰωάννου
τοῦ καὶ Προδρόμου τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐὰν τύχῃ ἐν Σαββάτῳ
ἢ Κυριακῇ, καταλύομεν ἔλαιον καὶ οἶνον, εὐχαριστοῦντες Χριστῷ τῷ
Θεῷ.
5.    Ὅταν τύχῃ ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Προδρόμου ἐν Σαββάτῳ, τὸ ἑσπέρας
τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρας ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Προδρόμου τὰ ἐν τῇ σειρᾷ
γ΄, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου ᾿Αλεξάνδρου γ΄, Δόξα, Γενεθλίων τελουμένων,
Καὶ νῦν τὸ τοῦ ἤχου Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, Δόξα [Καὶ
νῦν] τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Προδρόμου
καὶ Θεοτοκίον. Τὸ πρωῒ ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος κανὼν καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου·
ἐν τῇ γ΄ Ὠδῇ, Κάθισμα τοῦ Προδρόμου, ὡς καὶ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον,
τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ τῆς Κυριακῆς.

*(Printed Page 652)*

=== LEAF p668 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Beheading of the Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John (August 29, Concl. §§ 3–4, Fasting Rubric, § 5 Saturday Concurrence) (p. 653)]

653

the Forerunner, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion of the Forerunner and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”:
the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The
Resurrection Kathismata in order, and one of the Forerunner with each of
the Theotokia. At the 3rd Stasis [Stichologia], the Kathisma and Theotokion
of the Forerunner. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode
and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Forerun-
ner. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the
Kathisma of the Forerunner “Now appeared to us” and the Theotokion;
after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forerunner and the
Minologion. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,”
and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honor-
able”; Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner, and the
Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Forerun-
ner, Glory, “Again Herodias rages,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great
Doxology and “Today salvation.”
4.    In the Liturgy are sung the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and
4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Forerunner. After the
Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Forerunner, that of the
Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “Joachim and Anna.” Apostolos
and Gospel of the Forerunner. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion
Hymn “In eternal memorial,” “We have seen the [true] light” and
Dismissal.
      Note: we have received the tradition that the pious believers fast in
commemoration of the murder of the greatest of all Prophets, John, the
Forerunner of our Savior; but if the Feast occurs on Saturday or Sunday,
we are allowed oil and wine, giving thanks to Christ God.
5.    When this Feast of the Forerunner occurs on a Saturday, at the
Vespers that evening we chant 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Forerunner
and 3 of Saint Alexander, Glory, “While the birthday,” Now and ever the
first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: Glory [Now and ever] of
the Forerunner. The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Forerunner and
the Theotokion. In the morning, the Canons of the Resurrection and of the
Forerunner. At the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Forerunner, as well as the
Exapostilarion. The rest of the hymns are those of the Sunday.

*(Printed Page 653)*

=== LEAF p669 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Deposition of the Precious Cincture of the Most Holy Theotokos (August 31, §§ 1–4) (p. 654)]

654

Τῇ ΛΑ΄.    Ἡ Κατάθεσις τῆς τιμίας Ζώνης τῆς
Ὑπεραγίας Θεοτόκου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, τὴν διάταξιν
τῆς ᾿Ακολουθίας ὅρα Ἰουλίου β΄.    Ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ Καταβασίαι
ψάλλονται Σταυρὸν χαράξας Μωσῆς καὶ Κοντάκιον τὸ ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς
ἐπέχον τόπον Καθίσματος Τὰ καταθέσια τῆς σῆς θείας Ζώνης καὶ
καθεξῆς. (Διὰ τὸ σωστὸν Κοντάκιον, ὅρα ὑποσημείωσιν, σελ. 41).
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ᾿Αναστάσιμα
ς΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα, Ὡς στέφανον ὑπέρλαμπρον, Καὶ νῦν τὸ
α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Φρένα
καθάραντες καὶ νοῦν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς
Θεοτόκε ἀειπάρθενε ἅπαξ, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
᾿Απολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, εἶτα
τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ
σειράν, ἀλλ᾿ ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίου τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ
Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ
᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Οἱ τῶν θαυμάτων ποταμοί· ἀφ᾿
ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ ᾿Αναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ
Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἐξαποστειλάριον, καὶ τὰ β΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Τὴν θεοδόχον γαστέρα σου Θεοτόκε* (ζήτει
ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς), ᾿Απόστολος Εἶχεν ἡ πρώτη σκηνή [ζήτει Νοεμβρίου
ΚΑ΄] καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 654)*

=== LEAF p670 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Deposition of the Precious Cincture of the Most Holy Theotokos (August 31, §§ 1–4) (p. 655)]

655

The 31st.    Deposition of the Honorable Belt [Cincture] of the
Most Holy Theotokos.

1.    If the Feast occurs on any day except Sunday, see July 2nd for
the order of service. In Matins, the Katavasie “Moses, having etched the
sign of the Cross” and the Kontakion from the 3rd Ode, taking the place
of the Kathisma “The placing of your Divine Belt” and so on. {For the
correct Kontakion, see the footnote on page 42.}
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried”
we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Feast, Glory, “As an
effulgent wreath,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode.
Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha:
the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “Let us purify our
hearts and minds.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast
“O ever-virgin Mother of God” (once), and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and
the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion
twice, and that of the Feast once; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The
Resurrection Kathismata in order and, in place of the Theotokia, those of
the Feast. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the
Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast. After the
3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, then the Kathisma “The
rivers of your wonders”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of
the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie “Moses, having
etched the sign of the Cross,” and the entire order of the Morning
Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria of the Resurrec-
tion, and the two of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4
of the Feast, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great
Doxology and “Today salvation.”
4.    In the Liturgy, we sing the Typika and the 4 Beatitudes of the Mode
and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast. After the
Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the
Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “The placing of your divine
Belt (see the 3rd Ode),* The Apostolos “The first tent” (see November 21)
and the Gospel of the Sunday. At the “Especially,” “It is meet,”
Communion Hymn “Praise [the Lord],” and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 655)*
