=== LEAF p1071 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Hymn of Kassiani – Hymn of the Church – Hypakoi – Ichos – Idiomelon – Ieratikon – Ieromartys) (p. 1056 / TD-77)]

TD-77

HYMN OF KASSIANI (Τροπάριον τῆς Κασσιανῆς, τό): St. Kassiani is also known by the names Kassia, Casia, Ikasia, Cassia, Cassiane, Kassiana,or Eikasia. She was a Hymnographer (9th c.) born in Constantinople to a noble family, who later matured as an unusually beautiful and learned woman— so much so that she was chosen to participate in a 'bridal show', at which the Emperor Theophilos was to choose a wife. Struck by Kassiani's beauty, the Emperor approached her and said 'Through a woman came forth the baser things,' referring to Eve's transgression. Kassiani responded, 'Through a woman came forth the better things', referring to the redemptive Incarnation of Christ through His Most Pure and human Mother. Stung by her too intelligent reply, the Emperor rejected her and instead chose Theodora as his wife. Following this, Kassiani entered monastic life and founded a women's monastery in Constantinople, closely allied with the famous Stoudion Monastery. Serving as abbess of the monastery, she wrote many liturgical hymns, at least twenty of which are included in the services of the Church. Of these hymns, the best-known (or at least most closely associated with her) is the Hymn of Kassiani, sung at the Matins Service of Holy Wednesday, usually sung on Holy Tuesday Evening. Her feast day is celebrated on 7 September.

*HYMN OF THE CHURCH. See TU NAU.

HYPAKOI: See YPAKOI.

ICHOS (ἦχος, ὁ): MODE or scale.

IDIOMELON, IDIOMELA (᾿Ιδιόμελον, τό· ᾿Ιδιόμελα, τά), Slav. samoglasen: A hymn having its own unique melody, meter, and content, which does not serve as a model for other hymns.

IERATIKON (῾Ιερατικόν, τό) Slav. Sluzhebnik: Also sometimes called the Ierotelestikon or Liturgikon. This is the book used by the priest which contains the priest's prayers for Vespers, Orthros , the Divine Liturgy and other services.

IEROMARTYS (῾Ιερομάρτυς): Holy Martyr.

*(Printed Page TD-77)*

=== LEAF p1072 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Ieron – Ieron Vima – Igumenos – Ikonomia – Ikonostasion – Ikos – Iliton Part 1) (p. 1057 / TD-78)]

TD-78

IERON (῾Ιερόν, τό): Sacred (adjective) or ALTAR.

IERON VIMA (῾Ιερὸν Βῆμα, τό): See SANCTUARY. It is also known, by some, by the terms: AGION VIMA, ALTAR, HOLY ALTAR, HOLY SANCTUARY, SANCTUARY, or VIMA.

IGUMENOS (ἡγούμενος): The abbot or leader of an Orthodox Monastery.

IKONOMIA (οἰκονομία): Lit. Economy or thrift; usually used to describe clerical dispensation depending on local conditions..

*IKONOSTASION (εἰκονοστάσιον, τό): Also spelled Iconostasion this is the screen of icons separating the SANCTUARY from the SOLEAS. Also known as the TEMPLON, it has three doors: 1) On the north, depicting the Archangel Michael; 2) On the south, depicting the Archangel Gabriel; and 3) The central door, called the BEAUTIFUL GATE, through which only clergy may pass. While in some jurisdictions, the term 'Royal Door' has been used to describe the Beautiful Gate, it should be used only for the central door leading from the Narthex into the Nave through which Byzantine Royalty entered the church in antiquity.

IKOS, pl. IKI (Οἶκος, οἱ): Each of the 24 Stanzas of the Akathist Hymn to the Theotokos is called an Ikos; also an Ikos is a specially constructed stanza, in honor of a particular feast, which is sung, together with the Kontakion, between the 6th and 7th Odes of the Canon. The Ikos develops the ideas expressed in the KONTAKION and, as a rule, concludes with the same refrain words as the Kontakion

ILITON See also ANTIMINSION:

    The Iliton is a rectangular cloth usually of red silk which is wrapped around the ANTIMINSION to protect it.

    It is forbidden to celebrate the Divine Liturgy without the Antiminsion. If the Holy Table is damaged or destroyed by some calamity the Divine Liturgy may still be celebrated using the Antim-

*(Printed Page TD-78)*

=== LEAF p1073 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Iliton Concluded – Imerologion – Immovable Feast Part 1) (p. 1058 / TD-79)]

TD-79

insion. If it becomes necessary to celebrate the Divine Liturgy on an unconsecrated altar table, the priest is permitted to do so as long as he uses an Antiminsion.

    Only a bishop may consecrate an Antiminsion. This may take place as a part of the consecration of a church, or in a separate rite. In this rite, the bishop will anoint a pocket sewn into the Antiminsion in which to place the Relics of the saints and Chrism sealing them in place with wax mastic. He then inscribes the Antiminsion with the name of the church for which it has been consecrated and signs it. He may also stamp it with his official seal.

    The use of an Antiminsion always remains under the jurisdiction of the Bishop. He bestows an Antiminsion and CHRISM on a priest as a sign that the priest has his authorization to celebrate the Sacred Mysteries. If a bishop withdraws this authorization from the priest, he also removes the ANTIMINSION.

IMEROLOGION (῾Ημερολόγιον, τό): For use in the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America this is a book published yearly by the Patriarchate of Constantinople containing the order of service for all services for a given ecclesiastical year. The book is derived annually using the directives contained in the TYPIKON.

    The Imerologion is a critical volume that must be used by the priest and the psalti to correctly organize and conduct the divine services of our holy Orthodox Church.

    Note that the Imerologion from the Ecumenical Patriarchate governs all services conducted in the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America and in its Metropolises. The Imerologion from the Church of Greece, while a valuable reference, does not govern the services in the Archdiocese of America.

*IMMOVABLE FEAST (ἀκίνητος ἑορτή, ἡ): A Feast whose occurence is permanently fixed to a particular date in the church calendar: e.g., the Nativity of Our Lord is always celebrated on 25 December. Similarly, the Annunciation of the Theotokos

*(Printed Page TD-79)*

=== LEAF p1074 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Immovable Feast Concluded – Incense – Introductory Psalm – Irinika – Irmos – Isapostolos Part 1) (p. 1059 / TD-80)]

TD-80

is always celebrated on 25 March.

INCENSE (θυμίαμα, τὸ or λιβάνι, τό): A fragrant tree-gum burned in a CENSER.

INTRODUCTORY PSALM (Προοιμιακὸς Ψαλμός, ὁ): This is Psalm 103, read at the beginning of Vespers.

IRINIKA (Εἰρηνικά, τά): Petitions beginning or ending with the phrase “In peace, let us beseech the Lord” («᾿Εν εἰρήνῃ τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν»).

IRMOS (εἱρμός, ὁ): A word meaning “link” in Greek. The Irmos is the first hymn of each ode of a Canon. It has a double function: it “links” the ode thematically with the Biblical canticle which serves as its prototype, and, by establishing the meter and melody for all the other hymns (TROPARIA) of the ode, it is the first “link” in their chain. (From APL)

ISAPOSTOLOS (᾿Ισαπόστολος): A title meaning “equal to the Apostles.” This is a special title given to some canonized saints in Eastern Orthodoxy. It is also used by Eastern Rite Catholic Churches under the jurisdiction of the Church of Rome. The title is bestowed as a recognition of these saints' outstanding service in the spreading and assertion of Christianity, comparable to that of the original apostles. Below is a partial list of saints to whom the title ‘equal-to-the-apostles’ has been applied:

    Mary Magdalene (1st century)
    Photini, the Samaritan Woman at the Well (1st century)
    Thekla (1st century)
    Abercius of Hieropolis (2nd century)
    Helena of Constantinople (ca. 250 – ca. 330)
    Constantine I, the Great (ca. 272 – 337)
    Nino of Georgia (ca. 296 – ca. 338 or 340)
    Patrick of Ireland (5th century)
    Cyril (827 – 869)
    Methodios (826 – 885)

*(Printed Page TD-80)*

=== LEAF p1075 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Isapostolos Concluded – Isodikon – Isodos Part 1) (p. 1060 / TD-81)]

TD-81

    Boris I of Bulgaria (died 907)
    Olga of Kiev (ca. 890 – 969)
    Vladimir (ca. 958 – 1015)
    Sava I of Serbia (1175 – 1235)
    Cosmas of Aetolia (1714 – 1779)
    Innocent of Alaska (1797 – 1879)
    Nicholas of Japan (1836 – 1912)

*ISODIKON (Εἰσοδικόν, τό) Slav. Vxodnaja, vkhovdnoe:
    The Entrance Hymn chanted by the clergy at the Small Entrance in the Divine Liturgy after they have exited the Sanctuary and stood at the center of the Soleas, facing the ALTAR TABLE. The most common Isodikon is “Come, let us worship and bow down” (Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν καὶ προσπέσωμεν...) After chanting the Isodikon, the clergy re-enter the Sanctuary through the BEAUTIFUL GATE.

ISODOS (Εἴσοδος) Slav. vkhod, vyxod. ENTRANCE.

    An entrance procession in which all clergy, preceded by one or more processional candle bearers, make their way out of the Sanctuary through the north door of the Iconon Screen to the Soleas and proceed before the Beautiful Gate where they pause for certain prayers and hymns before returning into the Sanctuary through the Beautiful Gate. Entrances are as follows:

    a. At Great Vespers: In this Entrance the deacon carries the censer.

    b. The Small Entrance: In this Entrance the deacon carries the Book of the Gospels

    c. The Great Entrance: In this Entrance the clergy bring the gifts of bread and wine set aside for the oblation of the Eucharist, from the table of PROTHESIS out of the Sanctuary and back to the Sanctuary before the HOLY TABLE. The deacon, holding the censer, carries the PATEN (DISKARION OR DISKOS) and the priest carries the HOLY CHALICE (Agion Potirion). Both Paten and Chalice are covered with their

*(Printed Page TD-81)*

=== LEAF p1076 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Isodos Concluded – Ison – Kalymmafchion – Kanion – Kanon Part 1) (p. 1061 / TD-82)]

TD-82

respective veils.

*ISON (ἶσον): The finalis, or tonic, of a Mode. When a hymn is chanted, the ison holders (isokrates) sing the note of the ison sotto voce either by repeating each syllable of the text or, in more rapid chants, by holding a continuous “o.”

KALYMMAFCHION (καλυμμαύχιον, τό) Slav. kamilavka: The familiar black cylindrical ‘stove pipe’ head covering worn by Orthodox clergy. In Greek use, those of the secular clergy have a small brim on top. Monks, whether priests or not, wear a monastc cowl or veil (Greek koukoulli, or Latin, cucullus) over the top of the hat. When worn by celibate Archimandrites and Bishops this is called an EPANOKALYMMAFCHION (over-kalymmafchion). In Slavic use, the cowl is permanently attached and the whole is called a klobuk, but the Greek cowl can be removed separately, and the rules for when to wear what are quite complicated. (Adapted from AE and FL.)

KANION (κανίον, τό): a small hand sprinkler, usually containing fragrant rosewater.

KANON, pl. KANONES (κανών, ὁ· κανόνες, οἱ): See also CANON.

    A hymn form that consists most often of eight or nine odes, and more rarely, of four, three or two odes. This hymn form pertains to the sacred event or the saint(s) being commemorated and is sung at the service of Matins. Each ode consists of several stanzas or troparia. Each of the nine odes is patterned after a CANTICLE from the Holy Scriptures (i.e. a biblical canticle) which relates to an Old Testament event which prefigures a New Testament event. Complete Canons, as a rule, have nine odes; the Second Ode, however, is most frequently omitted because of its severe divine condemnation of mankind. The special service known as the Great Canon is sung on the evening of Wednesday of the fifth week of Great Lent.

    If a canon had fewer than nine odes, it is called a tetraodion, triodion, or diodion, depending on whether it consists respectively of four, three, or two odes.

*(Printed Page TD-82)*

=== LEAF p1077 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Kanonarchis – Katanyktikon – Katasarkion – Katavasia – Kathagiasis – Kathisma Part 1) (p. 1062 / TD-83)]

TD-83

KANONARCHIS (Κανονάρχης, ὁ): A prompter or intoner. Lit. 'one who begins the kanon.'

KATANYKTIKON, KATANYKTIKA (Κατανυκτικόν, τό), pl. (Κατανυκτικά, τά): Hymns whose content is penitential, speaking of contrition and repentance.

KATASARKION, (Κατασάρκιον, τό): A thin white linen cloth placed on the bare surface of the Holy Altar Table as a ‘skin’ during the Consecration Service of a church. It is permanently held in place by a cord around the base of the table.

KATAVASIA, KATAVASIE (Καταβασία, ἡ), pl. Καταβασίαι, αἱ): The title for a classification of hymns which conclude each ODE of a CANON. In Greek, the title suggests the act of descending since these hymns were sung when the chanters descended (Greek καταβαίνω) from their stalls (στασίδια) and gathered together to sing them. On Sundays and major Feasts there is a katavasia after every ode. “Katavasie” refers also to the entire CANON with its 9 Odes which is chanted mostly before the Morning Gospel in the ORTHROS. Katavasie are often ‘seasonal’ and anticipate the next Great Feast. Thus the katavasie of Christmas are sung from the 21 November up to and including 25 December. The Katavasie most frequently chanted are those of the Canon to the Mother of God in Mode IV, “I shall open my mouth”(«᾿Ανοίξω τὸ στόμα μου». On non-festal days katavasie occur after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Odes only. (Adapted from AE.)

KATHAGIASIS or KATHAGIASMOS (Καθαγίασις, ἡ or Καθαγιασμός, ὁ): The Consecration or Sanctification of the gifts.

KATHISMA (Κάθισμα, τό) pl. KATHISMATA (Καθίσματα, τά); Slav. Sedalni: The word has several possible meanings. First, a Kathisma is one of the twenty sections into which the Septuagint (LXX) Old Testament Greek Psalter is divided for liturgical use in the Orthodox Church. Each Kathisma is divided into three sections (Στάσεις) composed of a variable number of Psalms, e.g., Kathisma #1 = Psalms 1-8; Kathisma #2 = Psalms 9-17; etc.

*(Printed Page TD-83)*

=== LEAF p1078 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Kathisma Concluded – Kathisma Hymn – Katzion – Ke Nyn – Keros) (p. 1063 / TD-84)]

TD-84

    Kathismata are also a group of hymns (τροπάρια). These short hymns are sung after the reading of each Kathisma of the Psalter at Matins. The term Kathisma derives from the Greek word seat and refers to the fact that the clergy and the congregation may sit when the kathismata are chanted. (modified from APL and AE)

    Finally, our last definition of a kathisma is that of a single Monastic Cell as follows:

    On Mount Athos, the Autonomous Monastic State of the Holy Mountain, a monastic republic in northern Greece, each of the monastic establishments (sketae, kellia, kalyvae, hesychasteria or kathismata), large or small, exists under the jurisdiction of one of twenty Sovereign Monasteries. One of the smallest types of these monastic establishments is called a Kathisma, a simple abode for one solitary monk.

KATHISMA HYMN: Also known as a SESSIONAL HYMN, Slav. Sedalen: a hymn sung as an introduction to “sitting,” i.e., a period of rest following such things as the lengthy chanting of the Psalter, the singing of the Polyeleos, or the singing of several Odes from the Canon at Matins. (From APL)

KATZION (Κάτζιον, τό): A small hand-held CENSER.

KE NYN (Καὶ νῦν). Lit. ‘And Now’: An abbreviation for the text “And Now and Ever and unto the ages of ages,” («Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων»). This abbreviation is used frequently in the TYPIKON being connected to the abbreviation DOXA.... The abbreviation is found in all Orthodox services.

KEROS (καιρός, ὁ): A right or fitting time, opportunity or occasion. This implies that receiving keros means to be allowed or permitted enough time by a HIERARCH to take part in or continue the service at hand. (First Greek Book, White, Ginn and Company, New York, 1937.)

*(Printed Page TD-84)*

=== LEAF p1079 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Kimisis – Kinonikon – Kiropigion – Kliros Part 1) (p. 1064 / TD-85)]

TD-85

*KIMISIS (κοίμησις, ἡ). See DORMITION

*KINONIKON (Κοινωνικόν, τό): A short hymn—frequently only a short verse from the Old Testament—sung melismatically (ornately, elaborately) by the choir or chanters, while the clergy take communion at the Altar, just before communion is given to the congregation. The most common Kinonikon is “Praise the Lord” («Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον»).

KIROPIGION (κηροπήγιον, τό): A candlestick

KLIROS, KLIRI (κλῆρος, ὁ· pl. κλῆροι, ἡ): A term commonly used to refer to the clergy. The term is also used to designate the area(s) of an Eastern Orthodox Church reserved for the chanters. The word refers to the general space in which the chanters or singers assemble for services. Sometimes the word is also used to describe the actual music stand on which music is stored.

    The name derives from the Greek word for “lot”, since originally those who read and sang were chosen by lot.[1]

    Traditionally, in cathedrals, monasteries and larger churches such as chapels belonging to seminaries and major parishes there would have been a kliros on both the north and south sides of the soleas at the eastern end of the church. The result is two choirs which may sing antiphonally. This was the practice in the Byzantine Imperial Cathedral of Hagia Sophia, in Constantinople, whose historical liturgical practice became the standard for all churches following the Byzantine liturgical tradition.

    This arrangement presupposes a number of singers on each side, adding up to a reasonably large total, and two highly-trained chanters skilled in leading the services. Unfortunately, highly-trained chanters are exceedingly rare today, and most churches have only one kliros, usually on the right of the SOLEA. Nevertheless some patriarchal cathedrals, larger monastic communities, seminaries, and churches with sufficient resources and singers, may continue to have two kliri.

*(Printed Page TD-85)*

=== LEAF p1080 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Kliros Concluded – Klitir Ravduchos – Kollyva – Kontakion Part 1) (p. 1065 / TD-86)]

TD-86

    A typical Orthodox Church today will often have a choir loft above the NARTHEX area at the western end of the church, in addition to the kliros in front of the IKONOSTASION on the south side of the SOLEAS.

    Today, in churches of the Greek and some churches of the Slavic tradition, chanters who sing at the kliros will often wear a black riassa or outer-cassock (ράσον). In the Armenian tradition, both men and women of the choir at the kliros will wear a STICHARION.

KLITIR RAVDUCHOS (κλητήρ ῥαβδοῦχος, ὁ): Staff-bearing usher.

KOLLYVA (κόλλυβα, τά): Boiled wheat used in the memorial service.

*KONTAKION (κοντάκιον, τό) pl. KONTAKIA (κοντάκια, τά): The Kontakion was a major poetic form in Byzantine hymnology which achieved its most sublime expression in the work of St. Romanos the Melodist (6th cent.), many of whose Kontakia are still in use today. Its narrative and theological topic is one of the great feasts, such as the Nativity of Our Lord (Christmas). A Kontakion is made up of 18-30 or more STROPHES or STANZAS each called an IKOS (οἶκος), which are structurally and metrically alike and thus set to the same melody. The initial letters of these stanzas formed an acrostic, spelling out either the name of the celebrated feast, or the name of the author-poet, or merely the Greek alphabet. These stanzas were preceded by a short introductory hymn or preamble called the proimion (προοίμιον) or kukulion (κουκούλιον), which is structurally and melodically independent of the stanzas yet sets the Mode and the refrain or efymnion (ἐφύμνιον), for each of the stanzas that follow it. Today, only the short introductory hymn, now bearing the name Kontakion, is performed in the Divine Liturgy immediately prior to the Trisagios or Thrice Holy Hymn. The Kontakion most commonly sung in the Divine Liturgy is “The Protection of Christians” («Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν»), honoring the Theotokos as inter-

*(Printed Page TD-86)*
