=== LEAF p671 ===
[Original Greek Text: Ritual Order of the Services of the Triodion; Sunday of the Publican and Pharisee (§§ 1–2 Opening) (p. 656)]

656

ΤΥΠΙΚΗ ΔΙΑΤΑΞΙΣ
ΤΩΝ ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΙΩΝ ΤΟΥ
ΤΡΙΩΔΙΟΥ

ΚΥΡΙΑΚΗ
ΤΟΥ ΤΕΛΩΝΟΥ ΚΑΙ ΦΑΡΙΣΑΙΟΥ

1.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας¹, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ᾿Αναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ζ΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄, Δόξα, Παντοκράτορ Κύριε, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Βεβαρημένων τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν, Καὶ νῦν, Ναὸς καὶ πύλη, ᾿Απολυτίκιον ᾿Αναστάσιμον, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
2.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Τριαδικὸν Κανόνα, τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὰ γ΄ Κατανυκτικὰ τροπάρια Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, Κύριε, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς κτλ. καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ

1. Πρὸς ἀποφυγὴν περιττολογίας ἐν ἑκάστῳ Ἑσπερινῷ Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου, καὶ μάλιστα καθ᾿ ὅσον ἐν τῇ Προθεωρίᾳ καὶ ἐν τῇ ἰδιαιτέρᾳ διατάξει τῆς ᾿Ακολουθίας τῆς Κυριακῆς (ἴδε σελ. 50) ἐσημειώθησαν τὰ δέοντα, ἐθεωρήθη περιττὸν νὰ γίνηται ἑκάστοτε μνεία περὶ Προοιμιακοῦ, Ψαλτηρίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, Προκειμένου καὶ λοιπῶν.

*(Printed Page 656)*

=== LEAF p672 ===
[English Facing Translation: Ritual Order of the Services of the Triodion; Sunday of the Publican and Pharisee (§§ 1–2 Opening) (p. 657)]

657

THE RITUAL ORDER
OF THE SERVICES
OF THE TRIODION

SUNDAY OF THE
PUBLICAN AND THE PHARISEE

Saturday evening¹ at “Lord, I have cried,” [we chant] seven Stichira of the Resurrection and three of the Triodion; Glory, “Almighty Lord,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Stichira of the Resurrection, Glory, “Mine eyes being weighed down,” “Now and ever,” “Temple and gate,” the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
2.    Sunday at Matins, after the Triadic Canon, the “It is meet,” the three Penitential Troparia “Have mercy upon us, Lord, have mercy upon us,” etc. and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord,”: the Resurrection Apolytikion (twice) and the Theotokion (once), the [appointed Kathisma of the] Psalter and the Amomos [(Psalm 118) “Blessed are they”], the Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. Both the Canon of the Resurrection and that of the Triodion with the Verse “Glory to You, our God, glory to You.” After the Third Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion with its Ikos, the Kathisma of the Triodion: [“Humility he uplifted and the evil ones he overpowered” Glory, “Humility he uplifted, again the Publican’s Cry,” Now and Ever,] and the Theotokion [“Receive quickly, O Virgin, our prayers”]. After the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion of the Triodion [“Let us shun the proud attitude, Let us bring humble groans to the Lord,”] and Ikos of the Triodion [“Let us

1. In order to avoid superfluous repetition in the order of service of every Sunday Vespers of the Triodion, since this order has already been noted in the Protheoria of the Typikon in the service of every Sunday, it has been thought as unecessary to mention in every occasion the following items: The Introductory Psalm (103), the Psalter, the Hymn O Gladsome Light, the Prokimenon, etc.

*(Printed Page 657)*

=== LEAF p673 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Sunday of the Publican and Pharisee (Concl. §§ 2–3, Fasting Rubric); Sunday of the Prodigal Son (§ 4) (p. 658)]

658

Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ὡς ἐν Ἠπείρῳ πεζεύσας ὁ Ἰσραήλ, εἶτα² Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου, τὸ ᾿Ανάστασιν Χριστοῦ, καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, Δόξα, Τῆς μετανοίας ἄνοιξόν μοι, Καὶ νῦν, Τῆς σωτηρίας εὔθυνόν μοι, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Τροπάριον Τὰ πλήθη τῶν πεπραγμένων μοι δεινῶν, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα ε΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄, Δόξα, Ταῖς ἐξ ἔργων καυχήσεσι, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Φαρισαίου φύγωμεν κενοδοξίαν, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις³.

Τὴν ἑβδομάδα ταύτην γίνεται κατάλυσις εἰς πάντα.

ΚΥΡΙΑΚΗ ΤΟΥ ΑΣΩΤΟΥ

4.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ζ΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄, Δόξα, Ὢ πόσων ἀγαθῶν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Τῆς πατρικῆς δωρεᾶς, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, ᾿Απολυτίκιον ᾿Αναστάσιμον, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

2. Ἐν ταῖς λοιπαῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου παρέρχεται ἐν σιγῇ τὸ Τυπικὸν τὰ περὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου τοῦ Ὄρθρου καθὼς γνωστά, ἐπιδιώκον τὴν σύντομον ἔκθεσιν, οὐδεμία ἀμφιβολία ὑπάρχει.
3. Ἐὰν κατ᾿ αὐτὴν τὴν Κυριακὴν ἢ ἑτέραν ἐκ τῶν τριῶν ἀκολούθων συμπέσῃ ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς, ἢ διαρκῶσι τὰ μεθέορτα αὐτῆς, ἴδε τὰ ἀποκείμενα ἐκεῖ.

*(Printed Page 658)*

=== LEAF p674 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Sunday of the Publican and Pharisee (Concl. §§ 2–3, Fasting Rubric); Sunday of the Prodigal Son (§ 4) (p. 659)]

659

humble ourselves, brethren”], the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion, the Katavasie “When Israel walked on foot.” [After the 8th Irmos, the Priest (or Deacon) intones] “Let us pray to the Lord,” the Gospel of Matins², then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ,” is recited and Psalm 50 is sung. Glory, “Open to me the doors of repentance,” Now and ever, “Prepare for me the ways of salvation,” the Verse “O merciful One, have mercy on me, O God,” and the following hymn in Mode II Plagal “If I think upon the multitude of my evil deeds.” Then “More honorable,” [after which we chant the Ninth Irmos of the Katavasia]. The following Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion “Let us run away,” and the Theotokion [“O all-praised Theotokos”]. At the Praises: five Resurrection Stichira and three Stichira of the Triodion, Glory, “{O Lord, You did reproach the Pharisee,} for his boastful deeds, Now and ever, “Most blessed.” The Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and four Makarismi of the Mode and four verses from the Sixth Ode of the Triodion Canon. After the [Small] Entrance, the following Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint of the Church (Tu Nau) and the Kontakion “Let us flee from the words of the boastful Pharisee.” This Sunday’s Apostolos (2nd Timothy 3:10-15) and Gospel (Luke 18:10-14). At the Exclamation “Especially [for the all-Holy, all-Pure, all-Blessed and glorious Lady Theotokos]” [by the Priest, the Choir sings] “It is meet,” the Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [True] Light” and Dismissal.³
This week is free of fasting.

SUNDAY OF THE PRODIGAL SON

4.    Saturday evening at “Lord I have cried” we chant seven Stichira of the Resurrection and three of the Triodion; Glory, “Of what good things have I” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Stichira of the Resurrection; Glory, “[Having squandered the riches] of the fatherly gift,” Now and ever, “My maker and deliverer,” the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Theotokion and Dismissal.

2. On the rest of the Sundays of the Triodion, the Typikon, seeking brevity, is silent concerning the Gospel of Matins, since the topic is well known, and there is no doubt as to its content.
3. If the Feast of the Presentation (February 2) or its Post-Feast falls on this or one of the following three Sundays, a special order is followed. [See the Order of Service of 2 February for details.]

*(Printed Page 659)*

=== LEAF p675 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Sunday of the Prodigal Son (§§ 5–6, Fasting Rubric); Meatfare Saturday (Heading, § 7 Opening) (p. 660)]

660

5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Τριαδικὸν κανόνα, τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὰ γ΄ Κατανυκτικὰ τροπάρια καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, μετὰ στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου καὶ τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Τὴν Μωσέως ᾠδὴν καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον, τὸ [τὰ] τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα ε΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄, Δόξα, Πάτερ ἀγαθέ, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ κοντάκιον Τῆς πατρῴας δόξης σου, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
Σημ. Τὴν Τετάρτην καὶ τὴν Παρασκευὴν κατάλυσις οὐ γίνεται.

ΣΑΒΒΑΤΟΝ ΠΡΟ ΤΗΣ ΑΠΟΚΡΕΩ
Μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν πάντων τῶν ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος Κεκοιμημένων ὀρθοδόξων Χριστιανῶν, πατέρων καὶ ἀδελφῶν ἡμῶν.

7.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν [καὶ τὴν

*(Printed Page 660)*

=== LEAF p676 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Sunday of the Prodigal Son (§§ 5–6, Fasting Rubric); Meatfare Saturday (Heading, § 7 Opening) (p. 661)]

661

5.    Sunday at Matins, after the Triadic Canon and the Triadic “It is meet,” the three Penitential Troparia and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord,” the Resurrection Apolytikion (twice) and the Theotokion (once), the [appointed Kathisma of the] Psalter and the Amomos (Psalm 118) “Blessed are they,” the Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. Both the Canons of the Resurrection and of the Triodion with the Verse “Glory to You, our God, glory to You.” After the Third Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos followed by the Kathisma of the Triodion {“Open to me quickly Your paternal embrace,” Glory, Now and ever} and its Theotokion {“Pure unwedded Virgin Theotokos.”} After the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion of the Triodion {“When I disobeyed in ignorance Your fatherly advice,” and the Triodion Ikos {“Our Savior’s every teaching”}; the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie “The song of Moses” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel as prescribed for a Sunday during the Triodion period. Then “More honorable,” [after which the Ninth Irmos of the Katavasia]. The following Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, two of the Triodion: “The riches of the grace which You, O Savior” and “I have squandered Your riches, O Lord” and the Theotokion “Holy Virgin Mother.” At the Praises: the 5 Resurrection Stichira and the 3 Triodion Stichira; Glory, “O Good Father,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
6.    At the Liturgy, the Typika and four Makarismi of the Mode and four verses from the Sixth Ode of the Triodion Canon. After the Small Entrance the following Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint of the Church (Tu Nau), and the Kontakion “{When I disobeyed in ignorance} Your Fatherly glory”: this Sunday’s Apostolos (1 Corinthians 6:12-20) and Gospel (Luke 15:11-33). At “Especially,” the choir sings “It is meet,” the Kinonikon “Praise,” “We have seen the [True] Light” and Dismissal.
    Note that Wednesday and Friday are fast days.

SATURDAY OF MEATFARE
On which we make commemoration for all of our Orthodox Christians, Fathers and brothers who from all time have fallen asleep.

7.    Friday evening after Introductory Psalm (Ps. 103) [and the accus-

*(Printed Page 661)*

=== LEAF p677 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Meatfare Saturday (Concl. § 7) (p. 662)]

662

συνήθη Στιχολογίαν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, Κάθισμα 18] εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Στιχηρὰ Μαρτυρικὰ τοῦ ἤχου γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τῶν κεκοιμημένων Τῶν ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος σήμερον νεκρῶν, Δόξα, Θρηνῶ καὶ ὀδύρομαι, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, τὸ Φῶς ἱλαρόν, [καὶ ἀντὶ προκειμένου] ψάλλομεν εἰς ἦχον πλ. δ΄ τὸ ᾿Αλληλούϊα τρίς, ἐκ τρίτου μετὰ τῶν ἑξῆς διὰ τὰς δύο τελευταίας φορὰς Στίχων· Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω καὶ προσελάβου Κύριε, καὶ ὁ ἕτερος Καὶ τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτῶν εἰς γενεὰν καὶ γενεάν· εἶτα τὸ Καταξίωσον. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ δ΄ Μαρτυρικὰ τοῦ ἤχου, Δόξα, ᾿Αρχή μοι καὶ ὑπόστασις, Καὶ νῦν, Πρεσβείαις τῆς τεκούσης σε. Μετὰ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις, ἀρχόμεθα ψάλλειν τὸν Κανόνα Ἐν οὐρανίοις θαλάμοις διηνεκῶς (ὅρα ἐν τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ) μετὰ τῶν Στίχων Πρεσβείαις τῶν Μαρτύρων σου, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἀνάπαυσον τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν δούλων σου, καὶ ὁ ἕτερος, Αἱ ψυχαὶ αὐτῶν ἐν ἀγαθοῖς αὐλισθήσονται, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ· ἀπ᾿ θ΄ ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς Θεὸν ἀνθρώποις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Ὁ βάθει σοφίας, Δόξα, τὸ τέλος Ἐν σοὶ γὰρ τὴν ἐλπίδα ἀνέθεντο, τῷ ποιητῇ καὶ πλάστῃ καὶ Θεῷ ἡμῶν, Καὶ νῦν, Σὲ καὶ τεῖχος καὶ λιμένα, εἶτα ψάλλονται τὰ τροπάρια Μετὰ πνευμάτων δικαίων, μνημονεύονται ἐπὶ τῶν κολλύβων τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν κεκοιμημένων ὡς ἑξῆς· Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου, δεόμεθά σου ἐπάκουσον καὶ ἐλέησον· ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ μακαρίας μνήμης καὶ αἰωνίου ἀναπαύσεως τῶν ψυχῶν τῶν κεκοιμημένων δούλων σου, Βασιλέων, Πατριαρχῶν (κτλ. κατὰ λέξιν ὡς ἐν § 9 σημειοῦται)..., εἶτα Ὁ Θεὸς τῶν πνευμάτων καὶ πάσης σαρκός... αὐτός, Κύριε ἀνάπαυσον καὶ τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν κεκοιμημένων δούλων σου Βασιλέων, Πατριαρχῶν... ὅτι σὺ εἶ ἡ ᾿Ανάστασις, ἡ ζωὴ καὶ ἡ ἀνάπαυσις πάντων τῶν κεκοιμημένων εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων χριστιανῶν, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν καὶ σοὶ τὴν δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν σὺν... κτλ. ὡς ἐν τῇ § 9, εἶτα γίνεται ἡ ᾿Απόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 662)*

=== LEAF p678 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Meatfare Saturday (§ 7 Continued) (p. 663)]

663

tomed reading from the Psalter, Kathisma 18] at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing three Martyrika of the Mode of the week {(these will be found in the back of the Triodion)} and the following three Stichira for those who have fallen asleep: {“As we believers fulfill today the memorial of all those who have fallen asleep,” “O Savior, who did buy us men with Your blood,” “O Christ, by Your Resurrection from the dead,} Glory, I wail and moan {when I think of death},” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O gladsome light,” then we chant the following in Mode IV Plagal:
    1.    “Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia!
    2.    Blessed are they whom You have chosen and taken unto You, O Lord.
          Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia!
    3.    And their memorial is from generation to generation.
          Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia!”
    Then “Vouchsafe, O Lord” is recited. At the Aposticha: four Maryrika of the Mode (these will be found in the Friday Vespers of the appropriate Mode in the Paraklitiki); Glory, “The beginning of the creation of my stature [was by Your creating command],” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the one who bore You.” After “Lord, now let Your servant depart,” we begin singing the Canon “In heavenly rooms continually” (this Canon is found in the Pentikostarion [in the Panichida Service of Saturday before Pentecost]) with the verses “Through the intercessions of Your Martyrs, Christ our God, give rest to the souls of Your servants” and the alternate “Their souls will rest in righteous places,” Glory, Now and ever, is sung in each ode. At the Ninth Ode, the Irmos “It is impossible for men {to see God,}” the Trisagion, then the Apolytikion “In the depths of wisdom,” Glory, the ending “For in You have they placed their hope, O our Creator, and Author, and God”, Now and ever, “{We have You} as a rampart and haven.” Then the following hymns are sung:
    “With the souls of the righteous dead give rest.”
    {“In the place of your rest.”
    Glory, “You are the God who descended into Hell.”
    Now and ever, “O Virgin alone Pure and Undefiled.”}
    After these hymns, the Priest, standing in front of the memorial wheat (kolyva), commemorates the names of those who have fallen asleep as follows:
    Priest: “Have mercy upon us, O God, according to Your great mercy, we beseech You hear us and have mercy.”

*(Printed Page 663)*

=== LEAF p679 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Meatfare Saturday (Matins § 8 Opening) (p. 664)]

664

8.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Ὁ βάθει σοφίας καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος· τὸ ᾿Αλληλούϊα εἰς ἦχον πλάγιον δ΄ τὰς δύο πρώτας φορὰς ἄνευ Στίχων καὶ τὰς δύο ἄλλας μετὰ τῶν στίχων· Μακάριοι ... Καὶ τὸ μνημόσυνον.

εἶτα τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Συναπτὴν τὰ τοῦ ἤχου Καθίσματα, τὰ Νεκρώσιμα καὶ τὰ Μαρτυρικά, εἶτα ὁ Ἄμωμος μέχρι τοῦ Τότε ἂν ἀπωλόμην ἐν τῇ ταπεινώσει μου (τῆς β΄ στάσεως), τὸ δὲ Εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα οὐ μὴ ἐπιλάθωμαι τῶν δικαιωμάτων σου, ὅτι ἐν αὐτοῖς ἔζησάς με ψάλλεται τρὶς εἰς ἦχον πλ. α΄ καὶ μνημονεύονται τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν κεκοιμημένων (ὡς χθὲς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ), εἶτα ἐξακολουθεῖ τὸ Σός εἰμι ἐγὼ σῶσόν με μέχρι τοῦ Καὶ τὰ κρίματά σου βοηθήσει μοι· τὸ δὲ Ἐπλανήθην ὡς πρόβατον ἀπολωλός ψάλλεται εἰς πλ. α΄ ἦχον ἐκ τρίτου καὶ εὐθὺς τὰ Νεκρώσιμα Εὐλογητάρια, καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα μνημονεύονται πάλιν τὰ ὀνόματα ... μετὰ τὴν ἐκφώνησιν τὸ Κάθισμα ᾿Ανάπαυσον Σωτὴρ ἡμῶν καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον Ὁ ἐκ Παρθένου ἀνατείλας, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ὁ κανὼν τοῦ Τριῳδίου χῦμα· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου· ἀπ᾿ θ΄ ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς...

*(Printed Page 664)*

=== LEAF p680 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Meatfare Saturday (Concl. § 7; Matins § 8 Opening) (p. 665)]

665

{Choir: “Lord, have mercy.” (3 times)}
Priest: “Again we pray for the blessed memory and eternal rest of the souls of Your departed servants, Kings, Patriarchs, {Priests, Deacons, Monks, and Nuns, and for our fathers, forefathers, grandparents and ancestors, parents, brothers, and relatives who have departed this life, Christ our God, and to You do we ascribe glory with Your beginningless Father and Your all-Holy, Good and Life-giving Spirit, now and ever and unto the ages of ages. Amen.”} Done as in Paragraph 9.
Then: O God of spirits and all flesh...give rest O Lord, to the souls of Your servants who have fallen asleep, Kings, Patriarchs... For You are the Resurrection, the life and the repose of all pious and Orthodox Christians who have fallen asleep, Christ our God, and to You we send up glory with {Your eternal Father, and Your all-Holy and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.}
Then the Dismissal.
8.    Saturday after the Midnight Service, the Apolytikion “In the depths of wisdom,” and the Exapsalmos. The Alleluia in Mode IV Plagal as follows:
    1.    Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia!
    2.    Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia!
    3.    Blessed are they whom You have chosen and taken unto You, O Lord.
          Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia!
    4.    And their memorial is from generation to generation.
          Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia!
    Then the Apolytikion as in Vespers, {the Kathisma of the} Psalter and after the {Small} Litany, the Kathismata of the Mode, those of the dead and of the Martyrs, then the Amomos (Psalm 118) to verse 92 [of the Second Stasis]: “I should have perished in my affliction.” Then Verse 93 is sung in Mode I Plagal: “I will never forget Your precepts; for by them You have given me life” (3 times), and the names of those who have fallen asleep are commemorated {by the priest} (as yesterday in Vespers); then the Psalm continues from Verse 94: “I am Yours, save me” up to verse 175: “and let Your ordinances help me.” Then, in Mode I Plagal, verse 176: “I have gone astray like a lost sheep; {seek Your servant, for I do not forget Your commandments.”} (3 times in Mode I Plagal) and immediately the Benedictions for the dead (Nekrosima Evlogitaria), after which the Priest again commorates the names. After the Exclamation {“For You are the Resurrection,”} the Kathisma “Grant to Your servants rest,” {Glory, Now

*(Printed Page 665)*
