=== LEAF p241 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 21: Entrance of the Theotokos Concl. & Sunday Concurrence (p. 226)]

226

Εἰς τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς εὐδοκίας καὶ Κοντάκιον, Ὁ καθαρώτατος Ναὸς, ὁ Ἀπόστολος Εἶχεν ἡ πρώτη σκηνὴ, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Εἰσῆλθεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄγγελοι τὴν εἴσοδον τῆς Παρθένου . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ θεοῦ Κιβωτῷ, Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
8.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς ς΄, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δὶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
9.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δὶς, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Δικαίων ὁ καρπός. Εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Δικαίων ὁ καρπός. Εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν Ἀναστάσιμα δύο καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Δαβὶδ προοδοποίησον {Αὐτὸ τὸ Κάθισμα εἶναι ἡ 2α Στάσις ἀμφοτέρων τῆς 20 καὶ 22 Νοεμβρίου.} Εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν, τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἡ Αἴτησις, ἡ Ὑπακοη, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἄκουσον θύγατερ καὶ ἴδε, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριὰμ, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ θεασάμενοι, καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα Σήμερον ὁ ναὸς ὁ ἔμψυχος Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτὸ, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Σήμερον ὁ θεοχώρητος Ναὸς Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ οἱ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα, εἶτα τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς Καθίσματα {Αὐτὸ εἶναι πιθανὸν λάθος διότι τὸ Μηναῖον ἀναφέρει μόνον ἕν Κάθισμα ψαλλόμενον δίς}, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, εἶτα ψάλλονται οἱ δύο Κανόνες τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδῆς μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων αὐτῶν καὶ ἡ Καταβασία Μεγαλυνον ψυχή μου . . . Μυστήριον ξένον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα Σήμερον τῷ Ναῷ προσάγεται, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

*(Printed Page 226)*

=== LEAF p242 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 21: Entrance of the Theotokos Concl. & Sunday Concurrence (p. 227)]

227

At the Entrance "O come let us worship ... wonderful in Your Saints," the Apolytikion "Today is the foreshadowing of the good pleasure of God" and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple." The Apostolos "The first tent had," the Gospel "Jesus entered." At "Especially," "Beholding the entry of the Virgin ... Let no profane hand," Communion Hymn "[I will receive] the cup [of salvation]," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
8.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 of the Feast. Glory, Now and ever of the Feast. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever of the Feast, the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Feast (twice), and Dismissal.
9.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Feast and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion and that of the Feast twice, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in the First Stasis [Stichologia]: 2 of the Resurrection and the Feast's "The fruit of the righteous ones." In the Second Stasis, 2 of the Resurrection and the Feast's "David, pre-announce" {Note: this Kathisma is the Second Stasis of both November 20 and 22}. In the Third Stasis, the two Kathismata of the Feast "Before your conception" and "Let David the Psalmist" {Note: These are the 2nd and 3rd Kathismata of the Feast}, the Petition, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon of the Feast "Listen, O daughter." Then "Let everything that has breath" and the Gospel "And Mary arose," then Psalm 50 read. Glory, "Today the living temple," Now and ever repeat the same, then the Verse "Have mercy upon me" and the Idiomelon of the Liti "Today the God-containing temple." The Canons: of the Resurrection and the two of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the two Kathismata of the Feast, {Note: This may be an error since the Mineon indicates only one Kathisma which is sung twice}; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born"; at the 9th Ode the two Canons of the 9th Ode are sung with their Megalynaria and the Katavasia "Magnify of my soul ... A strange mystery," Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection and that of the Feast (twice). At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Feast, Glory, "Today enters in the Temple," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

*(Printed Page 227)*

=== LEAF p243 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 21: Entrance of the Theotokos Concl. / Sunday after the Feast / November 25: Apodosis of the Entrance and St. Catherine (p. 228)]

228

10.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα (ὅρα §7) μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος Ναὸς. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄγγελοι τὴν εἴσοδον τῆς Παρθένου . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ θεοῦ Κιβωτῷ, Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
11.    Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὴν ἑορτήν, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ μεθέορτα τῆς σειρᾶς δ΄. Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
12.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν, {ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς} καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν καὶ ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων τὰ μεθέορτα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ δεύτερος τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα μεθέορτον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινὸν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
13.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος ναὸς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΚΕ΄.    Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τῆς ἁγίας Μεγαλομάρτυρος [τοῦ Χριστοῦ] καὶ Πανσόφου Αἰκατερίνης. [καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου Μεγαλομάρτυρος Μερκουρίου.]

*(Printed Page 228)*

=== LEAF p244 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 21: Entrance of the Theotokos Concl. / Sunday after the Feast / November 25: Apodosis of the Entrance and St. Catherine (p. 229)]

229

10.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons (see Paragraph 7) with "who is risen from the dead"; after the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple." Apostolos and Gospel of the Feast. At "Especially," "Beholding the entry of the Virgin ... Let no profane hand," Communion Hymn "[I will receive] the cup [of salvation]," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
11.    On the Sunday after the Feast, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Post-Feast. Glory of the Feast, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever of the Post-feast. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast and Dismissal.
12.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, {the Liti of the Feast} and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion twice and that of the Feast once, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order and, in place of the Theotokia we do those of the Post-feast. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons: of the Resurrection and the second of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the two Kathismata of the Post-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then we chant the "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Post-feast, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
13.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple." Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 25th.    Leave-taking of the Feast [of the Entrance of the Theotokos] and the Holy Great-martyr [of Christ] and all-wise Catherine of Alexandria [and of the Holy Great-martyr Mercurius.]

*(Printed Page 229)*

=== LEAF p245 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 25: Apodosis of the Entrance & St. Catherine Cont. / Sunday Concurrence (p. 230)]

230

14.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ψάλλομεν τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια Σήμερον πιστοὶ χορεύσωμεν γ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας γ΄, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Ἀπόστιχα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Χαίρει ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
15.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ Καθίσματα τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἁγίας· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας γ΄, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.
16.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος ναὸς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Ἁγίας. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄγγελοι τὴν εἴσοδον ... Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ Θεοῦ Κιβωτῷ, Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
17.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Ἀπόδοσις ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας γ΄. Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς Ἁγίας, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
18.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἕν τῆς ἑορτῆς. {Ἐννοεῖται ὅτι τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντικαθιστᾷ τὸ Θεοτοκίον τῶν ἀναστασίμων Καθισμάτων}· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου

*(Printed Page 230)*

=== LEAF p246 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 25: Apodosis of the Entrance & St. Catherine Cont. / Sunday Concurrence (p. 231)]

231

14.    In Great Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 3 Stichira Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon. The Aposticha of the Feast: "Heaven and earth rejoice," Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Feast, of the Saint, and again of the Feast, and Dismissal.
15.    In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter, the Kathismata of the Saint and the Feast, Psalm 50 read, both Canons of the Feast and the Saint's. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint and the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the 9th Ode of the Feast is sung with the Megalynaria. Exapostilaria: of the Saint and that of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.
16.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple." The Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint. At "Especially," "Beholding the entry of the Virgin ... Let no profane hand," Communion Hymn "[I will receive] the cup [of salvation]," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
17.    If the Leave-taking occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Feast, and 3 of the Saint. Glory of the Feast, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Saint, and of the Feast. And Dismissal.
18.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Feast's {Note: it should be understood that the Kathisma of the Feast replaces the Theotokion of the Resurrection Kathismata}. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons

*(Printed Page 231)*

=== LEAF p247 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 25: Apodosis Concl. / November 30: Holy Apostle Andrew the First-Called (p. 232)]

232

καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἁγίας, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, καὶ ψάλλεται καὶ ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄. Δόξα Σήμερον τῷ Ναῷ προσάγεται, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
19.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἰς τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον, Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῆς Ἁγίας, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος Ναὸς, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄγγελοι τὴν εἴσοδον τῆς πανάγνου . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ θεοῦ Κιβωτῷ, Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι, μετὰ τὴν Ἀπόδοσιν τῆς ἑορτῆς τῇ πρώτῃ Κυριακῇ ἢ ἑορτῇ, ψάλλεται τὸ Προεόρτιον Κοντάκιον τῶν Χριστουγέννων Ἡ παρθένος σήμερον τὸν προαιώνιον Λόγον.

Τῇ Λ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀποστόλου Ἀνδρέου τοῦ Πρωτοκλήτου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ ἑσπέρια Προσόμοια Ὁ τῷ Προδρόμου φωτὶ μεμορφωμένος εἰς ς΄. Δόξα Τὴν τῶν ἰχθύων ἄγραν, Καὶ νῦν Προεόρτιον Ἡσαΐα χόρευε. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα· εἶτα τὰ Ἀπόστιχα· Δόξα Τὸν συναίμονα Πέτρου, Καὶ νῦν Προεόρτιον Ἰωσὴφ εἰπὲ ἡμῖν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὡς τῶν Ἀποστόλων πρωτόκλητος, Καὶ νῦν Τὸ ἀπ’ αἰῶνος ἀπόκρυφον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ἡ Λιτὴ, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα. Δόξα Ταῖς τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν Ταῖς τῆς θεοτόκου, Στίχος Ἐλέησόν

*(Printed Page 232)*

=== LEAF p248 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 25: Apodosis Concl. / November 30: Holy Apostle Andrew the First-Called (p. 233)]

233

of the Resurrection, of the Feast, and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathismata of the Saint and the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Matins Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable" and the 9th Ode of the Feast with its Megalynaria. Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint, Glory, "Today enters in the Temple," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
19.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, with "who is risen from the dead" at the second Antiphon. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple." Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "Angels beholding the entry of the Virgin ... Let no profane hand," Communion Hymn "The cup [of Salvation]," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
    Note that, after the Leave-taking of the Feast on the first Sunday or feast, the Pre-festal Kontakion "The Virgin today the pre-eternal word" is sung.

The 30th.    The Holy Apostle Andrew, the First-called.

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the first Stasis of the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing the 3 Prosomia twice each, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Pre-feast "Dance, O Isaiah." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day, and the Readings; then the Aposticha, Glory of the Saint "The kinsman of Peter", Now and ever of the Pre-feast "Joseph tell us." The Apolytikion "As the first-called of the Apostles," Now and ever, "The mystery hidden for centuries," and Dismissal.
2.    At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion twice, and the Theotokion once; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV, and the Prokimenon "Unto all the earth." Then "Let everything that has breath," and the Gospel of Matins, then Psalm 50 read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Apostles," Now and ever, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos"; the Verse "O merciful One, have mercy upon me," and

*(Printed Page 233)*

=== LEAF p249 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 30: Holy Apostle Andrew the First-Called Cont. & Sunday Concurrence (p. 234)]

234

με ὁ θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ὁ πρωτόκλητος μαθητής (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ τοῦ Μηναίου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου Τὴν τεθολωμένην μου ψυχήν, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὰ δύο Ἐξαποστειλάρια καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ Προσόμοια Βηθσαϊδὰ νῦν ἀγάλλου εἰς δ΄. Δόξα Τὸν κήρυκα τῆς πίστεως, Καὶ νυν Προεόρτιον Ὑπόδεξαι Βηθλεὲμ, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί. Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ α΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου δ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα Τὸν συναίμονα Πέτρου, Καὶ νῦν Ἰωσὴφ εἰπὲ ἡμῖν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα ἀνὰ ἓν Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ ἓν τοῦ Ἀποστόλου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου. Ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ Στιχολογίᾳ , τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ α΄ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου Τὴν τεθολωμένην μου ψυχήν, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα καὶ τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου δ΄, Δόξα, ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ, λέγεται τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

*(Printed Page 234)*

=== LEAF p250 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 30: Holy Apostle Andrew the First-Called Cont. & Sunday Concurrence (p. 235)]

235

the Idiomelon "The first-called Disciple," (look for it in the Liti); the Canon of the Theotokos, that of the Mineon and that of the Apostle. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born," then we sing "More honorable." The two Exapostilaria and the Theotokion. At the Praises: the Prosomia "Bethesda, now rejoice," Glory, "The proclaimer of faith," Now and ever, "Receive, Bethlehem," Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, hymns from the 3rd and 6th Ode of the second Canon. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Apostle, that of of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The Virgin today." Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "To all the world," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
4.    If the Feast of the Apostle occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Apostle. Glory of the Apostle, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint "The kinsman of Peter", Now and ever, "Joseph tell us." The Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that of the Apostle, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Apostle and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Apostle and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata, one of the Resurrection and one of the Apostle with the Theotokion. At the third Stasis [Stichologia], the Kathisma of the Apostle and the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and the First of the Apostle "My turbid soul." After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection read, then the Kathisma of the Apostle and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Apostle, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria of the Resurrection, of the Apostle and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Apostle, Glory, instead of the Eothinon, we sing that of the Apostle, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

*(Printed Page 235)*
