=== LEAF p611 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Saints Cosmas and Damian (July 1); Concl. of Feast (§§ 1–4); Deposition of the Precious Robe of the Theotokos (July 2); Heading & § 1 Opening (p. 596)]

596

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν
Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τοῦ Μηναίου.
Εἰς τὸ Δοξαστικὸν τῶν Ἀποστίχων, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ
ἄμπελος . . . μετὰ τῶν Ἀναργύρων.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄· Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄
Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου· Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς
τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά· Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν
Ἁγίων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ
τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ
ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή,
οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος,
καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Ἁγίων,
εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων, αἱ Καταβασίαι
Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια
τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄. Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τῶν Ἁγίων. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ
Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε. Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Β΄.    Ἡ Κατάθεσις τῆς τιμίας Ἐσθῆτος τῆς Ὑπεραγίας
Θεοτόκου ἐν ταῖς Βλαχέρναις.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Θεοτόκου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ, πλὴν

*(Printed Page 596)*

=== LEAF p612 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Saints Cosmas and Damian (July 1); Concl. of Feast (§§ 1–4); Deposition of the Precious Robe of the Theotokos (July 2); Heading & § 1 Opening (p. 597)]

597

1.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day except
Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon. At the
Glory of the Aposticha, Now and ever, “O Theotokos, you are the [true]
vine . . . with the Unmercenaries.”
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saints. Glory of the Saints,
Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira,
Glory of the Saints, Now and ever, “My creator and savior.” The
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saints, the Theotokion, and
Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet,”: then the Trisagion, the Ypakoi of the Mode and the
Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of
the Saints, and the Theotokion, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The
Resurrection Kathismata, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the
Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the
Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saints, then the
Kathisma of the Saints and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Saints.
The Katavasia “I shall open my mouth” and the entire order of the Morning
Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrec-
tion, of the Saints and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection
Stichira and 4 of the Saints, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most
blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saints. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saints, of the Saint of the Church,
and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians”; Apostolos of the Saints
and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion
Hymn “Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 2nd    The Deposition of the Honorable Robe of
theTheotokos, at Vlacherne.

1.    If the commemoration of the Theotokos occurs on any day except

*(Printed Page 597)*

=== LEAF p613 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Deposition of the Precious Robe of the Theotokos (July 2); Concl. of Feast (§ 1 Concl., §§ 2–4); Saint Athanasius of Athos (July 5); Heading & § 1 Opening (p. 598)]

598

Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ
διάταξιν, ἐν δὲ τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ Ψαλτήριον οὐ στιχολογεῖται.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακόν, καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα
ς΄ καὶ τῆς Θεοτόκου δ΄· Δόξα, Φρένα καθάραντες καὶ νοῦν, Καὶ νῦν,
τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου· Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὡς
στέφανον ὑπέρλαμπρον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Θεοτόκε
Ἀειπάρθενε, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Θεοτόκε ἀειπάρθενε,
καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον
δίς, καὶ τῆς Θεοτόκου ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος,
Καθίσματα, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, καὶ τῆς Θεοτόκου Τῆς σεπτῆς ἐσθῆτός
σου, καὶ αὖθις Καθίσματα Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, καὶ τῆς Θεοτόκου
Ἑορτάζει σήμερον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοί, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, καὶ ὁ τῆς
Θεοτόκου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἶτα τὸ
Κάθισμα Οἱ τῶν θαυμάτων ποταμοί· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ
στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον,
καὶ τὸ τῆς Θεοτόκου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, καὶ τῆς
Θεοτόκου δ΄. Δόξα, τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη,
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Θεοτόκου δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς Θεοτόκου, τὸ τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Περιβολὴν πᾶσι πιστοῖς (ζήτει ἀφ᾿
ς΄ Ὠδῆς)· Ἀπόστολος τῆς Θεοτόκου (ζήτει Νοεμβρίου ΚΑ΄), καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν.
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Ε΄.    Τοῦ Ὁσίου πατρὸς ἡμῶν Ἀθανασίου τοῦ ἐν τῷ
Ἄθῳ.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ὁσίου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν
Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ ψάλλεται μετὰ τῆς τοῦ ὁσίου

*(Printed Page 598)*

=== LEAF p614 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Deposition of the Precious Robe of the Theotokos (July 2); Concl. of Feast (§ 1 Concl., §§ 2–4); Saint Athanasius of Athos (July 5); Heading & § 1 Opening (p. 599)]

599

Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon; in Vespers
the Psalter is not read.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Theotokos. Glory of the
Theotokos “Cleansing the thoughts and the mind,” Now and ever the first
Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the
Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and
ever, “As a shining crown” The Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that of
the Theotokos “O ever-virgin Theotokos,” and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, “O ever-virgin Theotokos,” and
the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion of the Resurrection
(twice), and that of the Theotokos (once) then the Psalter and the Amomos.
The Kathismata: 2 of the Resurrection and that of the Theotokos “Of your
venerable robe”; and again 2 of the Resurrection and that of the Theotokos
“Today, the world celebrates.” The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi
of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of
the Theotokos. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, then
the Kathisma “The rivers of miracles”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion
and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Theotokos. The
Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning
Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrec-
tion and of the Theotokos. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of
the Theotokos, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great
Doxology and “Today salvation.”
4. In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from
the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Theotokos. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Theotokos, of the Saint of the
Church, and Kontakion “A vesture to all the faithful” (this is from the Sixth
Ode of the Canon). Apostolos of the Theotokos (see November 21) and
Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn
“Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.

The 5th    Our Righteous Father Athanasios of Athos.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except
Sunday, his Service, along with that of Saint Lambados, is sung according

*(Printed Page 599)*

=== LEAF p615 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Saint Athanasius of Athos (July 5); Concl. of Feast (§ 1 Concl.); Holy Great-Martyr Kyriake (July 7); Heading & §§ 1–4 (p. 600)]

600

Λαμπαδοῦ, κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
    Εἰ δὲ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας ὅρα
ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἀντωνίου (Ἰανουαρίου ΙΖ΄), ἡ δὲ Ἀκολουθία
τοῦ ὁσίου Λαμπαδοῦ ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις.

Τῇ Ζ΄.    Τῆς ἁγίας Μάρτυρος Κυριακῆς.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῆς Ἁγίας ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν
Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτῆς, μετὰ τῆς τοῦ ὁσίου Θωμᾶ τοῦ ἐν τῷ
Μαλεῷ, ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα
ς΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄· Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον
τοῦ ἤχου· Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά· Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν,
Θεοτοκίον ἐκ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς
Ἁγίας, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ
Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον,
τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος,
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου,
οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, καὶ
ὁ τῆς Ἁγίας· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ Θεοτοκίον,
ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον,
αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ
Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν,
Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον.
Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄ (τὰ τοῦ
Ἑσπερινοῦ). Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη,
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
[εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Θεοτόκου δ΄]. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος τῆς
Ἁγίας, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 600)*

=== LEAF p616 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Saint Athanasius of Athos (July 5); Concl. of Feast (§ 1 Concl.); Holy Great-Martyr Kyriake (July 7); Heading & §§ 1–4 (p. 601)]

601

to the order of the Mineon.
    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, see the Feast of Saint Anthony
(January 17) for the order of the service; the Service of Saint Lambados,
on the other hand, is sung at Compline.

The 7th    The Holy Martyr Kyriaki.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except
Sunday, her Service, together with that of the Righteous Thomas of Malea,
is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint,
Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira,
Glory of the Saint, Now and ever the Theotokion from the Oktoichos. The
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion, and Dis-
missal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Ypakoi of the Mode and the
Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of
the Saint, and the Theotokion, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The
Resurrection Kathismata, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the
Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the
Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion;
after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the
Minologion; the Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order
of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of
the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint (those of Vespers), Glory the
Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today
salvation.”
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode {and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint.} After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, of the Saint of the Church, and
Kontakion “Protection of all Christians,” Apostolos of the Saint and
Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet.” Communion Hymn
“Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 601)*

=== LEAF p617 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Holy Great-Martyr Euphemia (July 11); Heading, §§ 1–3, Patriarchal Note (p. 602)]

602

Τῇ ΙΑ΄.    Τῆς ἁγίας Μεγαλομάρτυρος καὶ πανευφήμου
Εὐφημίας.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν Α΄ Στάσιν
τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ ἕξ Προσόμοια τῆς Ἁγίας
ὡς καὶ τὸ Δόξα [τῆς Ἁγίας], Καὶ νῦν, Τίς μὴ μακαρίσει σε. Εἴσοδος,
Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα (ζήτει Ἰουλίου
ΚΖ΄). Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ
νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος . . . μετὰ τῆς ἀθληφόρου, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Λίαν εὔφρανας, Καὶ νῦν, Σὲ τὴν μεσιτεύσασαν, καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τοῦ Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς
τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, εἶτα τὸ
Ψαλτήριον, καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον
Ὑπομένων ὑπέμεινα τὸν Κύριον καὶ προσέσχε μοι, τὸ Πᾶσα
πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα· Δόξα, Ταῖς
τῆς ἀθληφόρου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος
Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ Σωτῆρος,
ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Θεοτόκου Ὑγρὰν διοδεύσας καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἁγίας· ἀπὸ
γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον Οὐ σιωπήσομεν· ἀφ᾿ ς΄
Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι
Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν,
τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ γ΄
Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄. Δόξα, Πᾶσα γλῶσσα κινείσθω, Καὶ
νῦν, Δέσποινα πρόσδεξαι, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ ἐκ τῆς
γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ἁγίας. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἁγίας, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον
Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος Ἀδελφοὶ συνεργοῦντες
παρακαλοῦμεν (ζήτει Κυριακῇ ΙΣΤ΄), καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον Τῷ καιρῷ
ἐκείνῳ, ἠρώτα τις τῶν Φαρισαίων (ζήτει τῇ β΄ τῆς Δ΄ ἑβδομάδος τοῦ
Λουκᾶ). Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς
μνημόσυνον αἰώνιον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Αὕτη ἡ τάξις τελεῖται ἐν τῇ Μεγάλῃ Ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἔνθα κεῖται
τὸ ἱερὸν τῆς ἁγίας λείψανον ἐν τῷ Παρεκκλησίῳ τῆς Παμμακαρίστου.

*(Printed Page 602)*

=== LEAF p618 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Holy Great-Martyr Euphemia (July 11); Heading, §§ 1–3, Patriarchal Note (p. 603)]

603

The 11th    The Holy and Illustrious Great-martyr Euphemia.

1.    In Vespers after the Introductory Psalm and the First Stasis of the
Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 6 Stichira and well as the Glory
{of the Saint}, Now and ever, “Who cannot but bless you.” Entrance, “O
Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings (these are found on
the 27th of the month). At the Aposticha: the 3 Prosomia Stichira and the
Glory, Now and ever, “Theotokos, you are the [true] vine . . . with the
Champion,” the Apolytikion “You delighted much.” Now and ever, “You,
the intercessor,” and Dismissal.
2.    At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti; then the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the
Apolytikion (twice) and the Theotokion, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos.
The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV,
the Prokimenon “I waited patiently for the Lord.” Then “Let everything
that breathes,” and the Gospel, the Psalm 50 read; Glory, “Through the
intercessions of the Champion,” Now and Ever, “Through the interces-
sions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “Have mercy on me, O God” and the
Idiomelon “Standing at the right of the Savior.” The Canon of the
Theotokos “Traversing the waters” and that of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode,
the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion “We shall not be silent”; after
the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, and the Minologion; the
Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” then we sing “More honorable.” The
Exapostilarion of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: the 3
Stichira of the Saint in 4, [repeating the first one] Glory, “Every tongue is
moved,” Now and ever, “Lady, accept,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes of the 3rd and 6th Ode
of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the Saint,
of the Saint of the Church, and Kontakion “Protection of all Christians.”
Apostolos of the Saint “Brethren, working together, we plead” (see the
16th Sunday), and the Gospel of the Saint “At that time one of the Pharisees
asked” (see Tuesday of the 4th Week of Luke). At “Especially,” “It is
meet,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial,” “We have seen the
[true] light” and Dismissal.
    This is the order celebrated at the Great Church, where the Holy
Relics of the Saint are kept in the Chapel of the All-blessed.

*(Printed Page 603)*

=== LEAF p619 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of July: Holy Great-Martyr Euphemia (July 11); Sunday Concurrence (§§ 4–6); Sunday of the Holy Fathers of the Fourth Ecumenical Council (Chalcedon); Heading, Note & § 1 Opening (p. 604)]

604

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ ς΄, καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄, Δόξα, τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄
Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα· εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τῆς
Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς Ἁγίας, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ
Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ
Ψαλτήριον, καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ τὸ τῆς
γ΄ στιχολογίας Κάθισμα τῆς Ἁγίας μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου, τὰ
Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἁγίας· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κοντάκιον
καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα τῆς Ἁγίας μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου·
ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ
Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια,
τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄. Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας (μόνον ἐν τῷ
πατριαρχικῷ ναῷ) (ἐννοεῖται ὅτι εἰς ἄλλα μέρη ψάλλεται τὸ Ἑωθινόν.
Ὅταν ἡ 11η Ἰουλίου ἔπεσε τὸ 1993 εἰς Κυριακήν, ἡ τάξις τοῦ
Πατριαρχείου ὑπέδειξε τὸ Ἑωθινόν). Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη,
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος τῆς
Ἁγίας καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων τῆς Δ΄ Οἰκουμενικῆς
Συνόδου, τῶν ἐν Χαλκηδόνι συνελθόντων.

Σημ.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ τῇ ἀπὸ τῆς ΙΓ΄ τοῦ Ἰουλίου μηνὸς μέχρι τῆς
ΙΘ΄ συμπιπτούσῃ, ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων ὡς
ἑξῆς.
1.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον

*(Printed Page 604)*

=== LEAF p620 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of July: Holy Great-Martyr Euphemia (July 11); Sunday Concurrence (§§ 4–6); Sunday of the Holy Fathers of the Fourth Ecumenical Council (Chalcedon); Heading, Note & § 1 Opening (p. 605)]

605

4.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried”
we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint,
Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira,
Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “My creator and savior.” The Apolytikia:
of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Saint, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion
of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as
in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata
and the Third Stasis [Stichologia] of the Saint with its Theotokion. The
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon.
The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the Saint and
the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, and
the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire
order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria:
of the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint (only in the
Church of the Patriarchate). {This means that elsewhere the Eothinon is
done instead. When the 11th of July fell on a Sunday in 1993, the order of
service of the Patriarchate indicated the Eothinon}. Now and ever, “Most
blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, of the Saint of the Church, and
the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians.” Apostolos of the Saint and
Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn
“Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The Sunday of the Holy Fathers of the Fourth Ecumenical
Council, convening in Chalcedon.

Note: On Sunday between July 13th and 19th of July, we sing the Service
of the Holy Fathers as follows:

1. In Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and

*(Printed Page 605)*
