=== LEAF p631 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Seven Holy Maccabees and the Procession of the Cross (August 1, Heading, §§ 1–3, § 4 Opening) (p. 616)]

616

ΜΗΝ ΑΥΓΟΥΣΤΟΣ

Τῇ Α΄. Τῶν ἁγίων ἑπτὰ Μακκαβαίων καὶ ἡ Πρόοδος τοῦ
τιμίου καὶ ζωοποιοῦ Σταυροῦ.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα τοῦ Σταυροῦ Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων γ΄, Δόξα, Οἱ
ἅγιοι Μακκαβαῖοι, Καὶ νῦν, Ὅνπερ πάλαι Μωϋσῆς, Εἴσοδος,
Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ
Σταυροῦ, ὧν οἱ Στίχοι Ὑψοῦτε Κύριον τὸν Θεὸν ἡμῶν . . . καὶ
Ὁ δὲ θεὸς Βασιλεὺς ἡμῶν . . . . Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν
τοῦ Σταυροῦ, Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὰς ἀλγηδόνας τῶν Ἁγίων, Σῶσον
Κύριε τὸν λαόν σου ἅπαξ, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων δίς, καὶ τοῦ Σταυροῦ ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον,
τὰ Καθίσματα, οἱ Κανόνες τοῦ Σταυροῦ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων κατὰ τὴν ἐν
τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας· εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, καὶ ἡ Καταβασία Μυστικὸς εἶ
θεοτόκε παράδεισος, Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τοῦ Σταυροῦ.
Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Σταυροῦ, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων.
      Σημ. Τὸ Ἱεροσολυμιτικὸν Τυπικὸν διατάττει καὶ κατ᾿ αὐτὴν
τὴν ἡμέραν μετὰ τὴν Δοξολογίαν νὰ τελῆται ἡ Πρόοδος τοῦ τιμίου
Σταυροῦ κατὰ τὴν τάξιν τῆς γ΄ Κυριακῆς τῶν Νηστειῶν. Ἐὰν γίνηται
Πρόοδος τοῦ Σταυροῦ, λέγεται ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου Τὸν Σταυρόν σου.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια
ἐκ τῆς γ΄ τοῦ α΄ Κανόνος Ὠδῆς καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ τοῦ β΄. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σῶσον Κύριε, τῶν Ἁγίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ
Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ, Ἀπόστολος Οἱ Ἅγιοι
Πάντες καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον (ζήτει Σεπτεμβρίου ΙΕ΄). Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐσημειώθη ἐφ᾿ ἡμᾶς,
Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Πρόοδος τοῦ Σταυροῦ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, τῷ
Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ

*(Printed Page 616)*

=== LEAF p632 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Seven Holy Maccabees and the Procession of the Cross (August 1, Heading, §§ 1–3, § 4 Opening) (p. 617)]

617

MONTH OF AUGUST

The 1st        The Seven Holy Maccabees and the Procession of
the Honorable and Life-creating Cross.

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have
cried” we chant 3 Prosomia {Stichira} of the Cross and 3 of the Saints.
Glory, “The Holy Maccabees,” Now and ever, “Whom Moses long ago.”
Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon of the day. The
Aposticha of the Cross with the Verses “Exalt the Lord our God” and “God
is our King,” Glory of the Saints, Now and ever of the Cross. Apolytikia:
“The sufferings of Your Saints,” “O Lord, save Your people” (once), and
Dismissal.
2.    In Matins, after the Exapsalmos, at “God is the Lord”: the
Apolytikion of the Saints (twice) and that of the Cross (once) then the
Psalter. The Kathismata, the Canons of the Cross and of the Saints,
according to the order of service in the Mineon. The Katavasie “Moses,
having etched the sign of the Cross,” then “More honorable” and the
Katavasia “O Theotokos, you are a mystical paradise.” Exapostilaria of
the Saints and of the Cross. At the Praises: Glory of the Saints, Now and
ever of the Cross. Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saints.
      Note: The Jerusalem Typikon {also} directs that on this day,
following the Doxology, the Procession of the Holy Cross should be
performed according to the order of service of the Third Sunday of Lent. If
the Procession is done, then, instead of the Trisagios Hymn, we sing “Your
Cross [we venerate].”
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, Hymns from the 3rd
Ode of the First Canon and Hymns from the 6th Ode of the Second Canon.
After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: “Save, O Lord, [Your people],” of the
Saints, of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “Lifted up on the
Cross.” Apostolos “Brethren, all the Saints” [See Sunday of All-Saints,
Hebrews 11:33 - 12:2] and Gospel (see September 15, {Matthew 10:16-
22}}). At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “[The light of
Your countenance was} marked on us,” “We have seen the [true] light,”
and Dismissal.
4.    If the Procession of the Cross occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on
Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at

*(Printed Page 617)*

=== LEAF p633 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Seven Holy Maccabees (August 1, Concl. §§ 4–6); Translation of the Relics of Saint Stephen (August 2, Heading, § 1 Opening) (p. 618)]

618

Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Σταυροῦ δ΄
(τῶν Ἁγίων Ἀκολουθία ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις), Δόξα τοῦ Σταυροῦ,
Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Σταυροῦ, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Σταυροῦ
ἅπαξ, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Σῶσον Κύριε τὸν λαόν σου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς
τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὰ τοῦ
Σταυροῦ ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων τὰ τοῦ Σταυροῦ, τὰ
Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Σταυροῦ, οὗ ὁ
Στίχος Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ
Κοντάκιον Ὁ Ὑψωθείς, καὶ τὸ Κάθισμα Ὁ Σταυρός σου Κύριε
ἡγίασται ἅπαξ· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ
τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ
ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν
τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ τοῦ
Σταυροῦ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Σταυροῦ δ΄.
Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη
καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Σταυροῦ δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Σταυροῦ, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ἐπὶ τοῦ Ὄρους μετεμορφώθης, Ἀπόστολος καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν.
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Β΄.    Ἡ Ἀνακομιδὴ τοῦ λειψάνου τοῦ ἁγίου
Πρωτομάρτυρος καὶ Ἀρχιδιακόνου Στεφάνου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα τὰ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου Τῇ τοῦ πνεύματος χάριτι εἰς
ς΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Τίς μὴ μακαρίσει σε, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς
ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄
Ἰδιόμελα Πρῶτος ἐν διακόνοις, μετὰ Στίχων Δίκαιος ὡς φοῖνιξ
ἀνθήσει καὶ Πεφυτευμένος ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ Κυρίου, Δόξα, Χαίροις

*(Printed Page 618)*

=== LEAF p634 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Seven Holy Maccabees (August 1, Concl. §§ 4–6); Translation of the Relics of Saint Stephen (August 2, Heading, § 1 Opening) (p. 619)]

619

“Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the
Cross (the Service of the Saints is celebrated at Compline). Glory of the
Cross, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O
Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection
Stichira, Glory, Now and ever of the Cross. The Apolytikia: of the
Resurrection, of the Cross (once), and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Save, O Lord
[Your people],” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrec-
tion Apolytikion (twice) and that of the Cross (once), then the Psalter and
the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and the Kathismata
of the Cross in place of the Theotokia. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the
Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrec-
tion and of the Cross whose verse is “Glory to You, our God, glory to You.”
After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion “Lifted up on the Cross,” the Kathisma
of the Cross “Your Cross, Lord, was sanctified” (once); after the 6th Ode,
the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the
Saints. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and
the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.”
Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection and of the Cross. At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Cross, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever,
“Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Cross. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Cross, of the Saint of the Church and
Kontakion “You were transfigured upon the mountain.” Apostolos and
Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn
“Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 2nd    The Transfer of the Remains of the Holy
Protomartyr and Archdeacon Stephen.

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm at “Lord, I have
cried,” we chant the Prosomia of the Saint “Through the grace of the
Spirit” (twice each) Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “Who cannot but
bless you.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon of the day.
At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela “First among deacons” with the Verses

*(Printed Page 619)*

=== LEAF p635 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Translation of the Relics of Saint Stephen (August 2, Concl. § 1); The Order of the Paraklesis (p. 620)]

620

ἐν Κυρίῳ Στέφανε μακάριε, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ
ἄμπελος . . . μετὰ τοῦ Ἀθλοφόρου, Νῦν ἀπολύεις καὶ εὐθύς·

Ἡ Παράκλησις.

      Ὁ Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ Προϊστάμενος) τὸν ψαλμὸν Κύριε
εἰσάκουσον τῆς προσευχῆς μου χῦμα, εἶτα ψάλλεται ὑπὸ τῶν
Χορῶν εἰς ἦχον δ΄ τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τετράκις Τῇ Θεοτόκῳ ἐκτενῶς
νῦν προσδράμωμεν . . . (Δόξα) τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ,
Καὶ νῦν, Οὐ σιωπήσωμέν ποτε Θεοτόκε καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα·
εἶτα ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν τῆς μικρᾶς Παρακλήσεως ἄνευ τῶν Εἱρμῶν,
ἀλλ᾿ εὐθὺς Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . Πολλοῖς
συνεχόμενος πειρασμοῖς ἀνὰ δ΄ Τροπάρια ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ· ἀπὸ
γ΄ Ὠδῆς, Διάσωσον ἀπὸ κινδύνων, καὶ Ἐπίβλεψον ἐν εὐμενείᾳ,
ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον
τετράκις ἀνὰ τρίς, εἶτα τὸ Πρεσβεία θερμὴ καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ Χορὸς
τῆς δ΄ Ὠδῆς· μετὰ τὴν ς΄ Ὠδὴν τὸ Διάσωσον ἀπὸ κινδύνων, καὶ
τὸ Ἄχραντε ἡ διὰ λόγου, καὶ αὖθις ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως ἡ Ἐκτενὴς
Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεός, εἶτα τὸ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν
χριστιανῶν καὶ εὐθὺς οἱ Χοροὶ τὸ Προκείμενον Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ
ὀνόματός σου, Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ,
Δόξα, Πάτερ, Λόγε, Πνεῦμα, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ
Στίχος, Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Μὴ καταπιστεύσῃς με . . .
Οὐδεὶς προστρέχων ἐπὶ σοὶ . . . Μεταβολὴ τῶν θλιβομένων
καὶ ὁ Ἱερεὺς Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν σου, οἱ Χοροὶ τὸ Κύριε
ἐλέησον ιβ΄, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ἐλέει καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ ζ΄, η΄
καὶ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Κανόνος. Μετὰ τὴν θ΄ Ὠδὴν ἐπισυνάπτονται καὶ τὰ
Μεγαλυνάρια Ἄξιόν ἐστιν ὡς ἀληθῶς . . . τὴν Ὑψηλοτέραν
τῶν οὐρανῶν κτλ. ὅταν δὲ ψάλληται τὸ Ἄλαλα τὰ χείλη τῶν
ἀσεβῶν, ὁ Πατριάρχης ἀσπάζεται τὴν εἰκόνα τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ
ἐπιστρέφων (εἰς τὸν θρόνον) εὐλογεῖ τὸν λαόν, τῶν Χορῶν ψαλλόντων
Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη· εἶτα ψάλλονται καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ Μεγαλυνάρια
Ψάλλομεν προθύμως σοι τὴν Ὠδήν, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ
τὸ Πᾶσαι τῶν Ἀγγέλων αἱ στρατιαί, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου Βασίλειον διάδημα, καὶ Θεοτοκίον Τὸ ἀπ᾿
αἰῶνος ἀπόκρυφον, ὁ Ἱερεὺς αὖθις Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κτλ.
ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τοῦ διαφυλαχθῆναι ... καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ τὸ Κύριε
ἐλέησον, ὁ Πατριάρχης Ἐπάκουσον ἡμῶν ὁ Θεός, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Σοφία,

*(Printed Page 620)*

=== LEAF p636 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Translation of the Relics of Saint Stephen (August 2, Concl. § 1); The Order of the Paraklesis (p. 621)]

621

“The righteous shall flourish” and “He who is planted in the house of the
Lord.” “Glory, “Rejoice in the Lord, blessed Stephen,” Now and ever,
“Theotokos, you are the [true] vine . . . with the Champion.” Then “Lord,
now let” and immediately:

The Paraklisis.

      The Patriarch (or the Proistamenos) reads the Psalm “O Lord, hear
my prayer,” then the Choirs sing “God is the Lord” (four times) in Mode
IV, “Let us turn fervently to the Theotokos . . .” [Glory] the Apolytikion
of the Saint of the Church, Now and ever, “Never, Theotokos, will we be
silent.” Psalm 50 read; then the Canon of the Small Paraklisis is sung
without the Irmos, but immediately we chant “Most holy Theotokos, save
us . . . Held captive by hosts of temptations” with 4 hymns in each Ode.
After the 3rd Ode, “Safeguard from dangers,” and “Look on me with
kindness.” The Priest: “Have mercy on us, O God”; and the Choirs:
“Lord, have mercy” (four times in three); then “Fervent advocate,” and
the 2nd choir begins the 4th Ode; after the 6th Ode, “Safeguard from
dangers,” and “Undefiled, who but by word” and immediately by the Priest
the Litany “Have mercy on us, O God.” Then the Kontakion “Protection
of all Christians” and immediately the Choirs [sing] the Prokimenon “I will
recall Your name.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Gospel
“In those days Mary arose.” Glory, “Father, Word and Spirit,” Now and
ever, “Through [the intercessions] of the Theotokos,” the Verse “Have
mercy on me, O God,” and then “Do not abandon me . . . No one who comes
to you . . . A turning away from sorrow and relief.” The Priest: “God, save
Your people”; the Choirs: “Lord, have mercy” (12 times); the Priest:
“Through the mercy and compassion,” and the 7th, 8th and 9th Odes of the
Canon are sung. After the 9th Ode are sung the Megalynaria “It is truly meet
. . . Her who stands higher than the heavens” etc. When “Let the lips of
the impious be mute” is sung, the Patriarch venerates the icon of the
Theotokos, and returning {to the Throne}, blesses the people, the Choirs
singing “Many years, O Master.” Then the rest of the Megalynaria are
sung: “Eagerly let us sing to you,” the Megalynarion of the Saint of the
Church and “All the ranks of the Angels”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion
of the Saint “A kingly diadem,” and the Theotokion “The mystery hidden
before all time.” The Priest immediately: “Have mercy on us” etc.
“Further we pray that this holy church may be kept . . .”; and the Choirs:
“Lord, have mercy”; the Patriarch “Hear us, O God”; the Priest:
“Wisdom, the One who is blessed”; the Patriarch “Hearken to us, O Lord

*(Printed Page 621)*

=== LEAF p637 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Order of the Paraklesis (Concl.); Translation of the Relics of Saint Stephen (August 2, Concl. § 2, Sunday Occurrence with Great Paraklesis) (p. 622)]

622

ὁ ὢν Εὐλογητός, ὁ Πατριάρχης Στερεώσαι Κύριος ὁ θεός, ὁ Ἱερεὺς
τὴν Ἀπόλυσιν Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, οἱ Χοροὶ Τὸν Δεσπότην καὶ
Ἀρχιερέα, τὸ Δι᾿ εὐχῶν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
      Σημειωτέον ὅτι οἱ δύο Παρακλητικοὶ τῆς Παναγίας Κανόνες,
ψάλλονται ἐναλλὰξ μέχρι τῆς ΙΔ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς τῇ μὲν α΄ ἡμέρᾳ ὁ μικρός,
τῇ δὲ β΄ ὁ Μέγας, καὶ οὕτω καθεξῆς.
      Τὸ πρωΐ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τοῦ Ἁγίου, ὡς καὶ ἡ τῆς
Λειτουργίας, ψάλλονται κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τοῦ Μηναίου.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ ἁγίου Στεφάνου ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, ἡ
Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῆς Ἀναστασίμου ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῇ
μνήμῃ τοῦ ἁγίου Παντελεήμονος διάταξιν ἐν §2, 3, 4, Ἀπόστολος καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς.
      Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια τῆς Ὀκτωήχου τῆς σειρᾶς β΄, ἓν τῶν
Ἀρχαγγέλων καὶ τρία τῶν Ὁσίων, Ἰσαακίου, Δαλμάτου καὶ Φαύστου, Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν Θεοτοκίον Προσόμοιον, τὸ Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς
ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Στιχηρὰ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν
Θεοτοκίον, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ ψαλμὸς Κύριε εἰσάκουσον τῆς
προσευχῆς μου, κτλ. κατὰ τὴν χθὲς διάταξιν, καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν τῆς
Μεγάλης Παρακλήσεως· Εὐαγγέλιον Τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ εἰσῆλθεν ὁ
Ἰησοῦς εἰς κώμην τινά. Μετὰ τὴν θ΄ Ὠδὴν τοῦ Κανόνος τὰ δ΄
Ἐξαποστειλάρια1 Ἀπόστολοι ἐκ περάτων· εἰς τὸ γ΄ ὁ Πατριάρχης
προσκυνεῖ τὴν εἰκόνα τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ ἐπιστρέφων (εἰς τὸν θρόνον) εὐλογεῖ
τὸν λαόν, τῶν Χορῶν ψαλλόντων τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη, εἶτα Χρυσοπλοκώτατε
πύργε, τὸ Τρισάγιον καὶ ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου τῶν Ἁγίων ὡς μὴ ἐχόντων
Δοξαστικόν, ψάλλονται τὰ τρία κατανυκτικὰ Τροπάρια Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς
Κύριε . . . Δόξα, Κύριε ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, Καὶ νῦν, Τῆς εὐσπλαγχνίας
τὴν πύλην . . . Ἐὰν ὅμως ψάλληται ἡ Παράκλησις ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Παρασκευῆς,
ἀντὶ τῶν Κατανυκτικῶν τούτων, λέγονται τὰ Τροπάρια Ἀπόστολοι,
Μάρτυρες, Δόξα, Μνήσθητι Κύριε . . . Καὶ νῦν, Μήτηρ Ἁγία . . .
ἐννοεῖται δὲ οἴκοθεν ὅτι μετὰ τὴν ἑορτὴν τῆς Μεταμορφώσεως λέγεται
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ταύτης.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Ἡ καὶ ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ διατυπουμένη τάξις ἀπαιτεῖ μετὰ τὴν Θ΄ (Ὠδὴν) τὰ
Μεγαλυνάρια Τὴν Ὑψηλοτέραν τῶν οὐρανῶν κτλ. καὶ μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον τὰ
ἐξαποστειλάρια Ἀπόστολοι ἐκ περάτων..ἀντὶ Ἀπολυτικίων. Ἐν ταῖς
Πατριαρχείαις ὅμως τηρεῖται ἡ ἀνωτέρω σημειουμένη τάξις.

*(Printed Page 622)*

=== LEAF p638 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Order of the Paraklesis (Concl.); Translation of the Relics of Saint Stephen (August 2, Concl. § 2, Sunday Occurrence with Great Paraklesis) (p. 623)]

623

our God,”; the Priest: the Dismissal “Glory to You, our God”; the Choirs:
“Our Master and Archpriest,” the “Through the prayers” and Dismissal.
      Note: the two Intercessory Canons of the Theotokos are chanted
alternately until the 14th of the month: on the first day the Small, on the 2nd
the Great, and so on.
      In the morning the Service of the Matins of the Saint and of the
Liturgy are sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast of Saint Stephen occurs on Sunday, the Service of the
Saint together with that of the Resurrection is sung according to the order
of Saint Panteleimon, Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4. Apostolos and Gospel of the
Sunday.
      On this Sunday evening, following the Introductory Psalm, at
“Lord, I have cried,” we sing 2 Prosomia Stichira of the Octoichos of the
sequence, 1 of the Archangels and 3 of the Righteous Isaakios, Dalmatos
and Faustos, Glory, Now and ever the Prosomion Theotokion. “O Glad-
some Light,” and the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the Stichira
of the Octoichos, Glory, Now and ever the Theotokion. Then “Lord, now
let” and immediately the Psalm “O Lord, hear my prayer” etc. according
to yesterday's order, and the Canon of the Great Paraklisis is sung, and then
the Gospel “At that time Jesus entered a certain village.” After the 9th Ode
of the Canon, the 4 Exapostilaria1 “Apostles from distant places”; at the 3rd
the Patriarch venerates the icon of the Theotokos, and returning {to the
Throne} he blesses the people, the Choirs singing “Many years, O Master,”
then “Tower with gold interwoven,” the Trisagion and instead of the
Apolytikion of the Saints, since they do not have a Glory Hymn [Doxastikon],
we sing the 3 Penitential Troparia: “Have mercy on us, Lord,” Glory,
“Lord, have mercy on us,” Now and ever, “The gateway to your compas-
sion.” If, however, the Paraklisis is chanted on Friday, instead of the above
penitential hymns, we say the Hymns: “Apostles, Martyrs,” Glory, “Re-
member, Lord,” Now and ever, “Holy Mother.” It is understood that
following the Feast of the Transfiguration we sing its Apolytikion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. The order of service in the Orologion indicates that, after the 9th Ode, the
Megalynaria “Her who stands Higher than the heavens ...,” etc., should be done;
and, after the Trisagion, the Exapostilaria “Apostles from distant places” should
be done instead of the Apolytikia. In the Patriarchate, however, the order
noted above is kept.

*(Printed Page 623)*

=== LEAF p639 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Forefeast of the Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Holy Martyr Eusignius (August 5, Heading, §§ 1–3, § 4 Opening) (p. 624)]

624

Τῇ Ε΄.    Προεόρτια τῆς Μεταμορφώσεως τοῦ Κυρίου
ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Μάρτυρος Εὐσιγνίου.

1.    Ἄν τύχωσι τὰ προεόρτια τῆς Μεταμορφώσεως ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ
πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν·
γίνεται δὲ καὶ Εἴσοδος. Μετὰ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις ψάλλεται ἡ
Παράκλησις ὡς εἴθισται· καὶ εἰς τὸ τέλος, μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον, ψάλλεται
τὸ προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον Χριστοῦ τὴν Μεταμόρφωσιν
προϋπαντήσωμεν ἅπαξ, εἶτα ἡ Ἐκτενής, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Τὸ πρωῒ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν κλπ. τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ προεόρτια Καθίσματα καὶ
ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, εἶτα οἱ Κανόνες μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός· ἀπὸ γ΄
καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς οἱ Εἱρμοὶ καὶ αἱ Αἰτήσεις· ἀπ᾿ θ΄ ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς
τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς Τὸν βασιλέα Χριστόν, καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν
τιμιωτέραν, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς θ΄ Σὲ τὴν ἀπειρόγαμον Θεοτόκον· εἶτα
τὸ προεόρτιον Ἐξαποστειλάριον δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια
Τῆς παναγίας ἐνδόξου Μεταμορφώσεως εἰς δ΄ (ζήτει εἰς τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα)(μᾶλλον εἰς τὸ Μηναῖον εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον ἀμέσως μετὰ τῶν
Ἐξαποστειλαρίων). Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Νόμου καὶ Προφητῶν σε
Χριστὲ (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτὴν τῆς ἑορτῆς), Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει χῦμα.
Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Προσόμοια Φέγγει τῶν ἀρετῶν, ἅπερ ἐψάλησαν
χθὲς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα Ἀγαθὸν τὸ
ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ. Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν, Δεῦτε
ἀγαλλιασώμεθα τῷ Κυρίῳ . . . Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ ἐν ἁγίοις
θαυμαστός. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ
ἐν ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, τὸ προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ
Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ προεόρτιον Κοντάκιον Ἐν τῇ θείᾳ σήμερον
Μεταμορφώσει, Ἀπόστολος Ἀδελφοί, εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός (ζήτει
τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς ΛΒ΄ ἑβδομάδος), καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς
τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἡμέρας, Εἴδομεν τὸ
φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Ἐὰν τύχωσι τὰ προεόρτια ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας,
μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ προεόρτια δ΄, Δόξα, Δεῦτε ἀναβῶμεν
εἰς τὸ Ὄρος Κυρίου (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτὴν τῆς ἑορτῆς), Καὶ νῦν
τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ἐν

*(Printed Page 624)*

=== LEAF p640 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Forefeast of the Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Holy Martyr Eusignius (August 5, Heading, §§ 1–3, § 4 Opening) (p. 625)]

625

The 5th    The Pre-feast of the Transfiguration of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ and the Holy Martyr Efsignios.

1.    If the Pre-feast of the Transfiguration occurs on any day except
Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon. The
Entrance is performed. After “Lord, now let,” the Paraklisis is sung as is
customary; and at the end, after the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Pre-
feast “Let us celebrate in advance the Transfiguration of Christ” is sung
once, then the Ektenis [Litany of Petitions], and Dismissal.
2.    In the morning at Matins after the Midnight Service etc., the
Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the
[Litany of Petitions] the Apolytikion twice, and the Psalter. The Kathismata
of the Pre-feast and Psalm 50 read, then the Canons with the Verse “Glory
to You, our God.” After the 3rd and the 6th Ode, the Irmi and the Petitions;
after the 9th Ode, we sing the Irmos of the 8th Ode “Christ the King”; then
we sing “More honorable,” then the Irmos of the 9th Ode “You, the
unmarried Theotokos”; then the Exapostilarion of the Pre-feast twice. At
the Praises: the Prosomia “Of the all-holy and glorious Transfiguration”
in 4 (seek in the Aposticha) {rather in the Mineon in Matins right after the
Exapostilaria}. Glory, Now and ever, “The fulfillment of the Law and the
Prophets” (see the Liti of the Feast), “To You belongs glory” read. At the
Aposticha: the Prosomia “The virtues shining,” which were sung yester-
day in Vespers.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons “It is good to give thanks to the
Lord.” “The Lord reigns,” “Let us be joyfull unto the Lord . . . Save us
...wondrous in Your saints.” After the Entrance, “Come, let us worship
. . . wondrous in the saints.” the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast, that of the
Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion of the Pre-feast “Today at the sacred
Transfiguration.” Apostolos “Brethren, blessed is God” (see Friday of the
32nd Week), and the Gospel of the day. At “Especially,” “It is meet,”
Communion Hymn of the day, “We have seen the [true] light,” and
Dismissal.
4.    If the Pre-feast occurs on a Sunday, Saturday at Vespers, following
the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6
Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Pre-feast. Glory, “Come, let us
ascend onto the mountain of the Lord” (see the Liti of the Feast), Now and
ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and
the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now
and ever, “He who on Mount Tabor” (see the Liti). The Apolytikia: of the

*(Printed Page 625)*
