=== LEAF p401 ===
[Original Greek Text: Meeting of our Lord; Situation IV Concl. (§§ 22 concl. – 23); Apodosis of the Feast (§ 24); February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation I (§ 1); Situation II Heading (p. 386)]

386

πνεύματι τῷ Ἱερῷ ἐκ τρίτου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια
Νόμον τὸν ἐν γράμματι εἰς δ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ἐν χερσὶ
πρεσβυτικαῖς· Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.
23 Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ
Εἰσοδικόν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος, τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπίς, Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον. Εἴδομεν τὸ
φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις· Δόξα Σοι, ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν, δόξα Σοι. Ὁ
ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ Δικαίου Συμεὼν βασταχθῆναι καταδεξάμενος,
διὰ τὴν ἡμῶν σωτηρίαν, κτλ.) Κατάλυσις οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.
24. Τῇ αὐτῇ Δευτέρᾳ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται
ὁ Ἑσπερινὸς ἀπαραλλάκτως ὡς προδιετυπώθη ἐν § 1, πλὴν τῶν
Ἀναγνωσμάτων· μετὰ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Χαῖρε Κεχαριτωμένη ἐκ
τρίτου, Ἀπόλυσις καὶ Ἀπόδοσις. Ἀπόδειπνον Μέγα οὐ λέγομεν
ταύτῃ τῇ ἑσπέρᾳ διὰ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς αἰδέσιμον, λέγομεν δὲ τὸ Μικρὸν
Ἀπόδειπνον ἐν τοῖς κελλίοις· καὶ ταῦτα διὰ τοὺς ἐν πόλεσιν Ἱεροὺς
Ναούς, ἐν δὲ ταῖς Ἱεραῖς Μοναῖς, ἐξακολουθήτωσαν κατὰ τὰ ἀρχαῖα
τῶν Κτητόρων αὐτῶν Τυπικά. Αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ γνώμη τῶν ἀοιδίμων
πατριαρχῶν Κωνσταντίου τοῦ Βυζαντίου καὶ Γρηγορίου τοῦ ΣΤ΄.
Ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ
ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου μέχρι τῆς Δευτέρας τῆς
Α΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν. (Ὅρα τὸν Πίνακα τῶν ΛΔ΄ Πασχαλίων).

Τῇ Ι΄. Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἱερομάρτυρος Χαραλάμπους.
ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.
1. Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἱερομάρτυρος ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν
τῆς Κυριακῆς ἀπὸ τῆς ἐνάρξεως τοῦ Τριῳδίου μέχρι τῆς Παρασκευῆς
τῆς Τυρινῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστὶ διατεταγμένη ἐν
τῷ Μηναίῳ. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ
Κοντάκιον ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν.

Β΄.

*(Printed Page 386)*

=== LEAF p402 ===
[English Facing Translation: Meeting of our Lord; Situation IV Concl. (§§ 22 concl. – 23); The Leave-taking (§ 24); February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation One (§ 1); Situation Two Heading (p. 387)]

387

Doxology and the Apolytikion.
23. In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, the Entrance Hymn, the Apolytikion, the Kontakion, the Apostolos, the Gospel, and then the Liturgy of Chrysostom. At “Especially,” “O Theotokos, the hope . . . In the shadow,” etc., Communion Hymn “I will receive the cup of salvation,” “We have seen the [true] Light” and Dismissal {“Glory to You, our God, glory to You. May He who for our salvation were carried in the arms of Symeon the Just, etc.,} The partaking of wine and oil is allowed.

The Leave-taking.
24. On this Monday evening the Leave-taking of the Feast and Vespers are sung without any alteration as prescribed in Paragraph 1, omitting the Readings. Then the Apolytikion “Hail, O Theotokos Virgin” 3 times, Dismissal and Leave-taking. We do not say the Great Compline this evening because of reverence for the Feast; we do, however, say the Small Compline in our cells. This observation pertains to the Churches in the City; in the Holy Monasteries, however, let them follow the order of the ancient Typika of their Founders. The above is the opinion of the revered Patriarchs Constantios the Byzantine and Gregory the Sixth.
The Feast of the Presentation of Our Lord may occur in the Triodion period from the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee until the Monday of the First Week of the Fast [Great Lent]. (See the Chart of the 34 Paschalia.)

The 10th. The Holy Hieromartyr Charalampos.

SITUATION ONE

1. If the Feast of the Hieromartyr occurs on any day except a Sunday, from the beginning of the Triodion period until the Friday of Cheesefare Week, his service is sung as prescribed in the Mineon. In Matins, Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and in the Liturgy the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians.”

SITUATION TWO

*(Printed Page 387)*

=== LEAF p403 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation II (§ 2); Situation III (§§ 3–4, § 5 incipit) (p. 388)]

388

2. Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ ἄνευ Τριῳδίου, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ
Ἁγίου μετὰ τῆς Ἀναστασίμου ψάλλεται ὡς καὶ εἰς ἄλλων ἑορταζομένων
Ἁγίων μνήμας, ὅταν τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ· Δοξαστικὸν τῶν Αἴνων
ψάλλεται τὸ Ἑωθινόν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς
Κυριακῆς. Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Κοινωνικὸν
Αἰνεῖτε, κτλ.

Γ΄.

3. Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ταῖς πρώταις τέσσαρσι Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου,
τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ
Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ
Ἁγίου γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου.
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ
Ἁγίου· εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου,
Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου,
τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

4. Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ψάλλεται ὁ
Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου
(ἐὰν ὑπάρχῃ)· εἰ δὲ μὴ Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ
τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ
Ἁγίου, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια
ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Τὰ
ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ τὸ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας
Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος,
ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα ψάλλεται τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ
τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ
Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς
Κυριακῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς
Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον,
τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳ-
δίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη· Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ
Σήμερον σωτηρία.
5. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου

*(Printed Page 388)*

=== LEAF p404 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Two (§ 2); Situation Three (§§ 3–4, § 5 incipit) (p. 389)]

389

2. If the Feast occurs on a Sunday outside the Triodion period, the
Service of the Saint together with that of the Resurrection is sung as on the
Feasts of other celebrating Saints, when these occur on a Sunday; for Glory
of the Praises is sung the Eothinon, the Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel
of the Sunday. Kontakion “Protection of all Christians,” Kinonikon
[Communion Hymn] “Praise [the Lord],” etc.

SITUATION THREE

3. If the Feast occurs on any of the first four Sundays of the Triodion
period, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm
and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrec-
tion, 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Saint. Glory of the Triodion, Now and
ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the
Prokimenon and the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the Resurrec-
tion Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Triodion. The
Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that of the Saint, the Theotokion and
Dismissal.
4. On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50 the Triadic Canon is sung and
the Liti of the Saint, Glory, Now and ever that of the Triodion (if there is
one); if not, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever the Theotokion and the Triadic
“It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint, and the
Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the
Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and that of
the 3rd Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the
Ypakoi and the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons
of the Resurrection, that of the Triodion and that of the Saint. After the 3rd
Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos, then is sung the Kathisma of the
Saint, that of the Triodion and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, the Minologion of the Saint and
the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie of the Triodion and the
entire order of the Morning Gospel of the Triodion. Then we sing “More
honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, the Triodion, the Saint and
the Theotokion. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Triodion
and 3 of the Saint, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever “Most blessed,”
Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

5. In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes of the Mode in four,

*(Printed Page 389)*

=== LEAF p405 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation III Concl. (§ 5); Situation IV: Saturday of Souls (§§ 6–7, § 8 incipit) (p. 390)]

390

εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ
τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Τριῳδίου· Ἀπόστολος τοῦ
Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Δ΄.

6. Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου
προψάλλεται τῇ Παρασκευῇ μετὰ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς Ὑπαπαντῆς ὡς
ἐφεξῆς.
Τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν
τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα
γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς,
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ
Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ
Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ
Ἁγίου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
7. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ψάλλεται ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ
Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν
Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὰ
Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Δίκαιος
ὡς φοῖνιξ ἀνθήσει, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τοῦ Ὄρθρου Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ
Ἁγίου, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ ἀθλοφόρου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς
τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλεησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τοῦ
Ἁγίου Φάλαγγα θεοστεφῆ, Κανόνες ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου·
ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον
καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον
ἀβυσσοτόκον, καὶ ψάλλονται τὰ Μεγαλυνάρια τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀκατάληπτόν
ἐστιν ὡς ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς,
τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς
Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς,
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.
8. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ
Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐγνώρισε Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ
Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ

*(Printed Page 390)*

=== LEAF p406 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Three Concl. (§ 5); Situation Four: Saturday of Souls (§§ 6–7, § 8 incipit) (p. 391)]

391

and 4 of the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Triodion. After the Entrance, the
Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church,
and Kontakion of the Triodion; Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the
Triodion. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise [the
Lord]” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

SITUATION FOUR

6. If the Feast of Saint Charalampos occurs on the Saturday of the
Souls, the Service of the Saint is sung in anticipation on Friday together with
the Leave-taking of the Presentation [of the Lord] as follows:
On Thursday at Vespers following the Introductory Psalm and the First
Stasis [Stichologia] of the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 3
Idiomela of the Feast and 3 Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now
and ever of the Feast. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and
the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela of the Feast,
Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Feast,
that of the Saint and again that of the Feast, and Dismissal.
7. In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint, then the Trisagion,
the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the
Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos of the Saint. The
Kathismata of the Saint and those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia, the
Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of the Mode IV and the Prokimenon “The
righteous shall flourish” [Psalm 91:13 LXX, 92:12 RSV]. Then “Let all
breath” and the Matins Gospel of the Saint; Psalm 50 read, Glory, “Through
the intercessions of the fight-bearing one,” Now and ever, “Through the
intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “Have mercy upon me” and the
Idiomelon of the Saint “God-crowned phalanx”; the Canons of the Feast
and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint and of the
Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the
Minologion. The Katavasie “The sun once shone” and the Megalynaria
“It is inconceivable” as on the day of the Feast. Exapostilaria: of the
Feast, of the Saint and again of the Feast. At the Praises: the 3
Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever
of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.
8. In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast and the Entrance Hymn
“The Lord has made known.” The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saint
and the Kontakion “By Your birth You sanctified a virgin womb.” Apostolos

*(Printed Page 391)*

=== LEAF p407 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation IV Concl. (§ 8); Situation V: Wednesday or Friday of Cheesefare (§ 9); Situation VI: Saturday of Cheesefare (§§ 10–11) (p. 392)]

392

Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπίς
[... Ἐν νόμῳ σκιᾷ], Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον σωτηρίου, Εἴδομεν
τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας καὶ τὸ πρωῒ ψάλλεται ἡ
Ἀκολουθία τῶν Ψυχῶν κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξιν.

Ε΄.

9. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ ἢ τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς Τυρινῆς, ἡ
Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν, ἄνευ
τῶν ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ Ἰδιομέλων τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τελεῖται ἡ Λειτουργία
τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, αἱ
Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν
Χριστιανῶν.

ΣΤ΄.

10. Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Τυρινῆς, τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας
μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Προσόμοια
τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ τῶν Ὁσίων Πατέρων γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἔθυσας
τῷ Θεῷ, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ διὰ σὲ Θεοπάτωρ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν,
τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου· Δόξα τῶν Ὁσίων, Καὶ νῦν,
Δέσποινα πρόσδεξαι, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τῶν Ὁσίων,
τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
11. Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὴν νενομισμένην τῆς
Ἀκολουθίας διάταξιν, Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου λέγεται τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου,
Κανόνες ὁ τῆς Θεοτόκου Ὑγρὰν διοδεύσας, ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ τῶν
Ὁσίων, [αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ
Ἁγίου, τῶν Ὁσίων]* καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Προσόμοια
τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ τῶν Ὁσίων γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Ὥσπερ ἀλάβαστρον
πλῆρες, Καὶ νῦν, Μακαρίζομέν σε, Δοξολογία Μ., τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ
Ἁγίου, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, Κοντάκιον
Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον
τῶν Ὁσίων, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον κτλ.

*(Printed Page 392)*

=== LEAF p408 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Four Concl. (§ 8); Situation Five: Wednesday or Friday of Cheesefare (§ 9); Situation Six: Saturday of Cheesefare (§§ 10–11) (p. 393)]

393

and Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “O Theotokos, the hope {. . . In
the shadow},” Communion Hymn “I will receive the cup of salvation,” “We
have seen the [true] Light,” and Dismissal.
That Friday evening and on Saturday morning the Service of the
Souls is sung according to the order of the Triodion.

SITUATION FIVE

9. If the Feast occurs on Wednesday or Friday of Cheesefare Week, the
Service of the Saint is sung according to the Order in the Mineon, without
the Idiomela of the day from the Triodion. Then the Liturgy of Chrysostom
is celebrated, Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint, Katavasie “I shall open my
mouth” and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians.”

SITUATION SIX

10. If the Feast occurs on the Saturday of Cheesefare, on Friday evening
after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 3 Prosomia of
the Saint and 3 of the Righteous Fathers, Glory of the Saint “You sacrificed
to God a sacrifice of praise,” Now and ever, “David the Prophet.”
Entrance, “O Gladsome light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings of the
Saint. At the Aposticha: the Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Righteous
Saints, Now and ever, “O Lady, accept.” The Apolytikia: of the Saint, of
the Righteous Saint, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
11. On Saturday in Matins, according to the stipulated order of the
Service, the Gospel of Matins is that of the Saint. Canons of the Theotokos
“Having crossed the water,” of the Saint, and of the Righteous Saints, [the
Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” the Exapostilaria of the Saint and of the
Righteous Saints,]* and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the
Saint and 3 of the Righteous Saints, Glory of the Saint “As alabaster,” Now
and ever, “We bless you,” Great Doxology, the Apolytikion of the Saint, and
then follows the Liturgy of Chrysostom, Kontakion “Protection of Chris-
tians,” Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Righteous Saints, Com-
munion Hymn “In eternal memory,” etc.

*(Printed Page 393)*

=== LEAF p409 ===
[Original Greek Text: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation VII: Clean Monday (§ 12); Situation VIII: Tuesday of First Week (§§ 13–14 incipit) (p. 394)]

394

Ζ΄.

12. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν, ἡ
Ἀκολουθία μετατίθεται καὶ ψάλλεται τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Τυρινῆς, κατὰ
τὴν προεκτεθεῖσαν διάταξιν ἐν § 3, 4, 5.

Η΄.

13. Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τρίτῃ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῇ
Δευτέρᾳ πρωῒ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν
Προσόμοια τῆς ἡμέρας τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ τὰ πρὸς τὸ
Ἔδωκας σημείωσιν, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον. Φῶς
ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας (ὑπονοεῖται ὅτι αὐτὰ εἶναι
ἐκ τοῦ Τριῳδίου). Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τῶν Ἀποστίχων
δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτοκίον Προσόμοιον, Νῦν
ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε κτλ. καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τὸ ἑσπέρας εἰς τὸ Μ. Ἀπόδειπνον ψάλλεται εἰς τοὺς Στίχους
τοῦ Παναγία Δέσποινα Θεοτόκε καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, μετὰ τὸν Στίχον
τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ οὕτως Ἅγιε ἔνδοξε Ἱερομάρτυς καὶ Θαυματουργὲ
Χαράλαμπες, πρέσβευε ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν τῶν ἁμαρτωλῶν.

14. Τῇ Τρίτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, οὐδὲν τῶν τοῦ Τριῳδίου ψάλλομεν,
ἀλλὰ μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ψάλλεται ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου δίς, καὶ ἅπαξ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, εἶτα τὸ
Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου κατὰ σειρὰν
μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ
Προκείμενον Δίκαιος ὡς φοῖνιξ ἀνθήσει, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ
Ἀθλοφόρου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ
Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Φάλαγγα θεοστεφῆ, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Θεοτόκου
Ὑγρὰν διοδεύσας, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ
τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ
Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν
Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς

*(Printed Page 394)*

=== LEAF p410 ===
[English Facing Translation: February 10: Hieromartyr Charalampos; Situation Seven: Clean Monday (§ 12); Situation Eight: Tuesday of First Week (§§ 13–14 incipit) (p. 395)]

395

SITUATION SEVEN

12. If the Feast occurs on Monday of the First week of Lent, the Service
is moved to and is sung on the Sunday of Cheesefare according to the order
outlined in Paragraphs 3, 4, 5.

SITUATION EIGHT

13. If the Feast occurs on Tuesday of the First Week of Lent, on Monday
at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 3 Prosomia of the day from the
Triodion and 3 of the Saint [the alternate set in Mode IV, using the melody
of “You gave a sign,” taken from Great Vespers in the Mineon], Glory, Now
and ever Prosomion Theotokion, “O Gladsome Light” and the Readings of
the day. {It is implied that these are the ones from the Triodion.} At the
Aposticha: the Idiomelon of the Aposticha twice and the one of the Martyrs,
Glory, Now and ever Theotokion Prosomion, then “Lord, now let,” the
Trisagion, the “Theotokos Virgin” etc., and Dismissal.
In the evening, at the Great Compline, we sing the group of Verses
“O Holy Lady Theotokos,” then the Verses of the celebrating Saint [St.
Charalampos] “Holy glorious Hieromartyr and Wonder-worker
Charalampos, intercede for us sinners.” Finally, we sing the Verses of the
Saint of the Church, written in a format similar to that of the Verses of the
celebrating Saint. {Violakis’s text here has been by necessity freely
paraphrased for the sake of clarity.}
14. Tuesday, at Matins, we sing nothing from the Triodion, but after
Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint is sung; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion
and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion of the Saint
twice, and the Theotokion once, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The
Kathismata of the Saint in order together with the Theotokia, the Anavathmi,
the first Antiphon of the Mode IV, and the Prokimenon “The righteous shall
flourish” {Psalm 91:13 LXX, 92:12 RSV}. Then “Let all breath” and the
Matins Gospel, then Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “Through the intercessions
of the fight-bearing one,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the
Theotokos,” the Verse “Have mercy upon me” and the Idiomelon of the
Saint “God-crowned phalanx.” The Canons of the Theotokos “Having
crossed the water” and that of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma
and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint
and the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth” and we sing
with verses the “More honorable.” The Exapostilaria of the Saint and the

*(Printed Page 395)*
