=== LEAF p331 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 7 Synaxis of the Forerunner Concluded (§ 6–7) and Sunday after Epiphany Opening (§ 8) (p. 316)]

316

μετ’ ἐγκωμίων, αὖθις Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

6.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος· Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας,
τὰ β΄ Καθίσματα Τοῦ Ἰησοῦ γεννηθέντος καὶ τὸ Ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις
βλέψας σε τοῦ Ἰορδάνου ἐκ δευτέρου, καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, ὁ Κανὼν
τῆς ἑορτῆς Βυθοῦ ἀνεκάλυψε μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς καὶ ὁ τοῦ
Προδρόμου Βαπτιζόμενον, μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠ-
δῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Ὁ μέγας ὑετὸς καὶ ἕτερον Ἑκὼν προῆλθεν ἐπὶ γῆς·
ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ
Καταβασίαι μόναι αἱ Ἰαμβικαί, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ α΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς Θ΄ μετὰ
τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ ἡ τοῦ Προδρόμου μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ
καὶ ἡ καταβασία Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου . . . Ὦ τῶν ὑπὲρ νοῦν·
Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς χθές, Δόξα, Ἄγγελος ἐκ στειρωτικῶν
ὠδίνων, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον ὁ Χριστὸς ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Μνήμη δικαίου.

7.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς χθές.
Εἰσοδικόν, Εὐλογημένος ὁ ἐρχόμενος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ,
Μνήμη δικαίου [τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ παραλείπεται
ἐδῶ, ἀλλὰ ὑποδεικνύεται εἰς §39 τῆς Προθεωρίας. Αὕτη ἡ παράληψις
ἐπισημαίνεται τὰ εἰς τὰ Δίπτυχα 1980, 1987, 1990, 1992, καὶ 1993]
καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου Ὅσοι εἰς
Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου.
Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Μεγάλυνον ἡ ψυχή μου . . . Ὦ τῶν ὑπὲρ νοῦν.
Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον αἰώνιον, τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

                      Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα.

8.    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ
Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ
μεθέορτα δ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς, Δόξα, Κύριε πληρῶσαι βουλόμενος (ζήτει
Δόξα τῆς Λιτῆς), Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς
ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα

*(Printed Page 316)*

=== LEAF p332 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 7 Synaxis of the Forerunner Concluded (§ 6–7) and Sunday after Epiphany Opening (§ 8) (p. 317)]

317

Apolytikion of the Forerunner “The memory of the just is praised,” and
again “When You, O Lord, were baptized in Jordan,” and Dismissal.
6.    On Saturday in Matins, after Psalm 50, the Apolytikion of the
Forerunner and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as
in Vespers, then the Psalter of the day, the 2 Kathismata “When Jesus was
born” and “When the great Forerunner saw You in the water of Jordan”
twice each, and Psalm 50 read. The Canon of the Feast “He discovered the
bottom of the depth of the sea” with the Verse “Glory to You, O God,” and
of the Forerunner “Being baptized” with the Verse “Saint of God, pray for
us.” After the 3rd Ode, the Kathismata “The mighty rain” and “Of His own
will has God”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forerunner
and the Minologion. The Katavasie (only the Iambic); then is sung the 9th
Ode of the first Canon with the Megalynaria and that of the Forerunner with
the Verse “Saint of God, pray for us” and the Katavasia “Magnify, O my
soul . . . O, the wonders of your birth-giving which are beyond the human
mind.” The Exapostilaria of the Forerunner and of the Feast. At the Praises:
the Idiomela of the Feast as yesterday, Glory, “As an angel you have come
forth,” Now and ever, “Today Christ in Jordan,” Great Doxology and “The
memory of the just is praised.”
7.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast as yesterday. Entrance
Hymn “Blessed is he that cometh.” The Apolytikia: “When You, O Lord,
were baptized in Jordan,” “The memory of the just,” and that of the Saint
of the Church [Note: This is omitted in this paragraph; however, it is called
for in Paragraph 39 of the Protheoria. This omission is noted in the Diptycha
Yearbooks: 1980, 1987, 1990, 1992, and 1993.] The Kontakion “You have
appeared today to the universe.” Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, we sing
“As many of you as were baptized into Christ”; the Apostolos and Gospel
of the Forerunner. At “Especially,” “Magnify, O my soul . . . O, the wonders
of your birth-giving which are beyond the human mind”; Communion
Hymn “The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance,” “When You,
O Lord, were baptized in Jordan,” and Dismissal.

                      Sunday after Epiphany.

8.    In Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm
and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrec-
tion, and 4 of the Post-feast of the prescribed order. Glory, “O Lord, wishing
to fulfill” (see the Glory of the Liti), Now and ever the first Theotokion of
the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the

*(Printed Page 317)*

=== LEAF p333 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday after Epiphany Concluded (§ 9–10), Apodosis in Situation 1 (§ 11), and Situation 2 Heading (p. 318)]

318

Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον ἡ κτίσις φωτίζεται (ζήτει
εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.

9.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἐν
Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ
ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ τῶν
Θεοτοκίων [τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ
τὸ Προκείμενον]. (Ἕνεκα τυπογραφικοῦ λάθους, φαίνεται ὅτι οἱ ὕμνοι
ἐν παρενθέσει παρελήφθησαν ὑπὸ τοῦ Βιολάκη εἰς τὴν παροῦσαν
παράγραφον.) Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ α΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς (μετὰ
τοῦ Στίχου Δόξα σοί, ὁ Θεός). Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ προεόρτιον Κάθισμα·
ἀπὸ ς΄, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον [τῆς
ἡμέρας]. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Στείβει θαλάσσης καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις
τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν,
Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

10.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ, καὶ τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

                          Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

11.    Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς κατὰ τὴν περίπτωσιν ταύτην
συμπίπτει τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς προσεχοῦς ἑβδομάδος, ἐν ᾧ ψάλλονται
ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐξαιρουμένων ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῶν
Ἀναγνωσμάτων, ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ τῆς Λιτῆς, τοῦ Πολυελέου καὶ τοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου τοῦ Ὄρθρου. Ἐν δὲ τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ Ἀπόστολος καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τοῦ Σαββάτου μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα.

                              Β΄.

*(Printed Page 318)*

=== LEAF p334 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday after Epiphany Concluded (§ 9–10), Apodosis in Situation 1 (§ 11), and Situation 2 Heading (p. 319)]

319

Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “Today
creation is illumined” (see in the Liti). The Apolytikia: that of the
Resurrection, and “When You, O Lord, were baptized in Jordan,” and
Dismissal.
9.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “When You, O
Lord were baptized in Jordan” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: 
the Resurrection Apolytikion twice and “When You, O Lord, were baptized
in Jordan” once, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection
Kathismata and those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia, [the Evlogitaria,
the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon]. {Because of
a typographical error it appears that the bracketed segments were omitted by
Violakis in this paragraph in the original text}. The Canons of the
Resurrection and the first of this Feast {with the Verse “Glory, to You, O
God”; after the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Post-feast; after the 6th Ode,}
the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the
day]}. The Katavasie “Israel passed through” and the entire order of the
Morning Gospel. Then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the
Resurrection and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and
4 of the Post-feast, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,”
Great Doxology, and “Today salvation.”
10.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4
hymns of the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast. After the Entrance, the
Resurrection Apolytikion, the “When You, O Lord, were baptized in
Jordan” and that of the Saint of the Church. The Kontakion “You have
appeared today”; Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday after Epiphany. At
“Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise [the Lord],” “We
have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

                       The Leave-taking.

11.    The Leave-taking of the Feast in this Situation occurs on Saturday
of the following week, on which day is sung all the office of the Feast with
the exception of the Readings at Vespers; of the Liti, the Polyeleos and the
Morning Gospel at Matins. In the Liturgy, the Apostolos and Gospel of the
Saturday after Epiphany are recited.

                        SITUATION TWO

*(Printed Page 319)*

=== LEAF p335 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situation 2: Theophany on Saturday (§ 12–13); Sunday after Epiphany & Synaxis of the Forerunner: Vespers & Matins (§ 14–15) (p. 320)]

320

12.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῶν Θεοφανείων ἐν Σαββάτῳ, τῇ Παρασκευῇ
πρωὶ μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Ὄρθρου ἐνδιάτακτον Ἀκολουθίαν, ψάλλονται αἱ Μ.
Ὧραι κατὰ τὴν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 1, διάταξιν τῆς Παραμονῆς τῶν
Χριστουγέννων. Ὁ δὲ Μ. Ἑσπερινός, ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου
καὶ ὁ ἐν τῷ τέλει τῆς Λειτουργίας Ἁγιασμός, ψάλλονται ὡς εἴρηται
ἀνωτέρω ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2 τῆς παρούσης ἑορτῆς.
13.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Μ.
Ἁγιασμοῦ καὶ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου ψάλλονται κατὰ τὴν
ἐν τῇ περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3 διάταξιν.

            Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα, καὶ ἡ Σύναξις τοῦ τιμίου
                              Προδρόμου.

14.    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ
Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄, τοῦ
Προδρόμου γ΄. Δόξα, Ἔνσαρκε λύχνε, Καὶ νῦν, Θεὸς λόγος ἐπεφάνη
ἐν σαρκί. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Μ. Προκείμενον Ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν
ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα,
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά. Δόξα, Ὡς τοῦ πνεύματος ἐραστής, Καὶ νῦν,
Δεῦτε μιμησώμεθα· τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προδρόμου
Μνήμη δικαίου, τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

15.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ [Τριαδικὰ] Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος
τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ
Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς Τοῦ
Ἰησοῦ γεννηθέντος καὶ Ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις βλέψας σε τοῦ Ἰορδάνου·
τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ Στίχου
Δόξα σοι, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, δόξα σοι καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου μετὰ Στίχου
Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ
Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Προδρόμου Ὁ Μέγας ὑετὸς καὶ τὸ Ἑκὼν
προῆλθεν ἐπὶ γῆς· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ
Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι Στείβει θαλάσσης καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ
Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀπορεῖ
πᾶσα γλῶσσα μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων, καὶ ἡ τοῦ Προδρόμου μετὰ

*(Printed Page 320)*

=== LEAF p336 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situation 2: Theophany on Saturday (§ 12–13); Sunday after Epiphany & Synaxis of the Forerunner: Vespers & Matins (§ 14–15) (p. 321)]

321

12.    If the Feast of the Epiphany occurs on a Saturday, on Friday
morning after the prescribed Matins Service, the Great Hours are sung
according to the order of Situation One, Paragraph 1 of the present Feast.
The Great Vespers, the Liturgy of Basil the Great, and the Service of the
Blessing of the Waters at the end of the Liturgy are sung as prescribed above
in Situation One, Paragraph 2 of the present Feast.
13.    On Saturday, the Matins of the Feast, the Great Blessing of the
Waters and the Liturgy of Chrysostom are sung according to the order of
Situation One, Paragraph 3.

Sunday after Epiphany, and the Synaxis of the Honored Forerunner.

14.    That Saturday evening, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I
have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Feast, and 3 of the
Forerunner. Glory, “You Light in the flesh,” Now and ever, “God the Word
appeared to mankind in the flesh.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the
Great Prokimenon “Our God in heaven and earth” with its verses. At the
Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, “As the lover of the Spirit,”
Now and ever, “Come, let us imitate the wise virgins.” The Resurrection
Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Forerunner “The memory of the just is
praised,” the Apolytikion “When You, O Lord, were baptized in Jordan,”
and Dismissal.
15.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Forerunner
and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers,
then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of
the Feast “When Jesus was born” and “When the great Forerunner saw
You in the waters of Jordan.” The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi
of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of
the Feast with the Verse “Glory to You, O God, glory to You” and of the
Forerunner with the Verse “Saint of God, pray for us.” After the 3rd Ode,
the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the Kathisma of the Forerunner
“The mighty rain” and the Kathisma “Of His own will has God”; after the
6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forerunner, and the Minologion. The
Katavasie “Israel passed through” and the entire order of the Morning
Gospel. Then the 9th Ode of the Feast “Every tongue is at a loss” with the
Megalynaria and that of the Forerunner with the Verse “Saint of God, pray

*(Printed Page 321)*

=== LEAF p337 ===
[Original Greek Text: Matins Concluded (§ 15 concl.), Liturgy (§ 16), and Apodosis in Situation 2: Vespers & Matins (§ 17–18) (p. 322)]

322

Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον τοῦ
Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ
τῆς ἑορτῆς Φῶς ἐκ φωτὸς δ΄ Δόξα, Ἄγγελος ἐκ στειρωτικῶν ὠδίνων,
Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον
σωτηρία.
16.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς χθές· εἰς
τὸ δεύτερον Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ ὑπὸ Ἰωάννου . . . Μετὰ
τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς. [Τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ παραλείπεται εἰς §15, σελ. 149 τοῦ
Τυπικοῦ. Παρουσιάζεται ὅμως εἰς §9, σελ. 33 τῆς Προθεωρίας].
Κοντάκιον Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον, ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου, τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς
Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου.²
Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου . . . Ὦ τῶν ὑπὲρ νοῦν.
Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

                          Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

17.    Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς συμπίπτει κατὰ τὴν περίπτωσιν
ταύτην τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς προσεχοῦς ἑβδομάδος (ΙΔ΄ τοῦ μηνός)· ἡ δὲ
Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἑξῆς· Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακόν, καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν
ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Τὸν φωτισμὸν ἡμῶν ς΄. Δόξα,
Ὑπέκλινας κάραν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς
ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρά. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸν ἐκ Παρθένου ἥλιον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δὶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
18.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ
Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος,
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων·
τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ

2. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα λέγονται τῇ ἐλευσομένῃ
Κυριακῇ, ὅτε συμπίπτει καὶ ἡ τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Θεοφανείων Ἀπόδοσις. Ἐὰν ὅμως
συμπέσῃ τῇ ΙΔ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς ἡ τοῦ Τριῳδίου ἀρχή, ἐν τοιαύτῃ περιπτώσει, τῇ Ζ΄ τοῦ
μηνὸς Ἀπόστολος λέγεται τοῦ Προδρόμου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὰ
Φῶτα.

*(Printed Page 322)*

=== LEAF p338 ===
[English Facing Translation: Matins Concluded (§ 15 concl.), Liturgy (§ 16), and Apodosis in Situation 2: Vespers & Matins (§ 17–18) (p. 323)]

323

for us.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner and of the
Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Feast “Light from
light,” Glory, “As an angel you have come forth,” Now and ever, “Most
blessed,” Great Doxology, and “Today salvation.”
16.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast as yesterday; at the second
Antiphon “Save us . . . Who was baptized by John in the Jordan.” At the
Entrance, “Come let us worship . . . who is risen from the dead.” The
Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Forerunner, of the Feast and of the
Saint of the Church. {This last Apolytikion is omitted on page 149,
Paragraph 15 of the original text; however, it does appear in Paragraph 39,
page 33 of the Protheoria.} Then the Kontakion “You have appeared
today”; instead of the Trisagios Hymn we sing “As many as have been
baptized into Christ.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Forerunner.² At
“Especially,” “Magnify, O my soul . . . Above all human thought,”
Communion Hymn “The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance,”
“When You, O Lord, were baptized in Jordan,” and Dismissal.

                       The Leave-taking.

17.    The Leave-taking of the Feast in this Situation occurs on Sunday of
the following week (the 14th of the month); its Service is sung as follows:
In Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the
Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and
6 of the Feast “Our illumination.” Glory, “You have bowed Your head
before the Forerunner,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode.
Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “The Sun born of a virgin.”
The Resurrection Apolytikion and that of the Feast twice and Dismissal.
18.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “When You, O
Lord, were baptized in Jordan” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: 
the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The
Resurrection Kathismata and those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia;
the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon.

2. The Epistle and the Gospel of the Sunday after Epiphany are said on the following Sunday,
when the Leave-taking of the Feast of Epiphany occurs. If, however, the 14th of January is the
beginning of the Triodion, then in this situation, on the 7th of the month, the Epistle of the
Forerunner and the Gospel of the Sunday after Epiphany are recited.

*(Printed Page 323)*

=== LEAF p339 ===
[Original Greek Text: Apodosis Matins Concluded (§ 18 concl.) & Liturgy (§ 19); Situation 3: Theophany on Sunday (§ 20–22) (p. 324)]

324

Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ οἱ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ
Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς
Ὅτε τῇ ἐπιφανείᾳ σου· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ
Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· αἱ
Καταβασίαι διπλαῖ καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα
ψάλλονται καὶ οἱ δύο τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς Κανόνες μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων,
Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς. Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Φῶς ἐκ φωτὸς δ΄. Δόξα,
Νάματα Ἰορδάνεια, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

19.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς β΄, Ὁ ἐν
Ἰορδάνῃ, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ {Τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ
Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ παραλείπεται εἰς σελ. 150, §19, τοῦ Τυπικοῦ·
παρουσιάζεται ὅμως εἰς σελ. 33, §39 τῆς Προθεωρίας. Ὅρα ἐπίσης
τὴν ὑποσημείωσιν εἰς σελ. 20 τῶν Διπτύχων, 1990}, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον
Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον, τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς
Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα (διότι τῇ παρελθούσῃ Κυριακῇ ἀνεγνώσθησαν
Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου). Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως,
Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου . . . Ὦ τῶν ὑπὲρ νοῦν. Κοινωνικὸν Ἐπεφάνη
ἡ χάρις τοῦ Θεοῦ, τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

                              Γ΄.

20.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῶν Θεοφανείων ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῇ Παρασκευῇ
πρωῒ (Δ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς) μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Ὄρθρου ἐνδιάτακτον Ἀκολουθίαν,
ψάλλονται αἱ Μ. Ὧραι μόνον καὶ λέγομεν Τροπάριον Ἑτοιμάζου
Ζαβουλὼν καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις σήμερον· μετὰ δὲ τὴν
Εὐχὴν τῆς Θ΄ Ὥρας ἡ Ἀπόλυσις. Ἐν τῇ τραπέζῃ κατάλυσις εἰς
πάντα.
21.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, ψάλλεται ὁ Προεόρτιος Ἑσπερινὸς
κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τοῦ Μηναίου· μετὰ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις, ψάλλονται ὁ
Κανών, καὶ μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπεστρέφετό ποτε, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
22.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν κτλ.

*(Printed Page 324)*

=== LEAF p340 ===
[English Facing Translation: Apodosis Matins Concluded (§ 18 concl.) & Liturgy (§ 19); Situation 3: Theophany on Sunday (§ 20–22) (p. 325)]

325

The Canons of the Resurrection and the two of the Feast with the Verse
“Glory to You, O God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi of the Feast “When
at Your epiphany”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the
Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Saints of the day Both [double]
Katavasie, and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing the 9th
Odes of both Canons with their Megalynaria. Exapostilaria of the Resurrec-
tion and of the Feast twice. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of
the Feast “Light of light.” Glory, “O Savior, who clothed yourself with the
waters of Jordan,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology, and
“Today salvation.”
19.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast; at the second Antiphon
“Save us . . . Who were baptized by John in Jordan.” The Entrance Hymn
of the Feast with “Who is risen from the dead.” The Resurrection
Apolytikion, that of the Feast “When You, O Lord, were baptized in
Jordan” and that of the Saint of the Church. {The Apolytikion of the Saint
of the Church is omitted on page 150, Paragraph 19 of the Typikon; it
appears, however, in Paragraph 39, page 33 of the Protheoria. See also the
note on page 20 of the Diptycha 1990.} The Kontakion “You have appeared
today”; the Trisagios Hymn, Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday after
Epiphany (since on the previous Sunday the Apostolos and Gospel of the
Forerunner were read). At “Especially,” “Magnify, O my soul . . . Above
all human thought,” Communion Hymn “The grace of God became
manifest today,” “When You, O Lord, were baptized in Jordan,” and
Dismissal.

                       SITUATION THREE

20.    If the Feast of Epiphany occurs on a Sunday, on Friday morning (the
4th of the month) after the prescribed Service of Matins only the Great Hours
are sung, and we say the Troparion “Make ready, O Zabulon” and the
Kontakion “Today has the Lord appeared on the waters of Jordan,” the
Dismissal after the Prayer of the 9th Hour. At table, all food is permitted {no
fasting}.
21.    On that Friday evening, the Vespers of the Pre-feast is sung
according to the order of the Mineon; after “Lord, now let your servant
depart,” the Canon is sung, and, after the Irmos of the 9th Ode, the Trisagion,
then the Apolytikion “The river Jordan turned back,” and Dismissal.
22.    On Saturday at Matins, after the Midnight Service, etc., the
Kathismata are read, then the Canon of the Pre-feast and that of the Saints

*(Printed Page 325)*
