=== LEAF p251 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 30: Concl. of St. Andrew Liturgy / Month of December / December 4: St. Barbara and St. John Damascene (p. 236)]

236

6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἀποστόλου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΜΗΝ ΔΕΚΕΜΒΡΙΟΣ

Τῇ Δ΄.    Τῆς ἁγίας Μεγαλομάρτυρος Βαρβάρας καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Ἰωάννου τοῦ Δαμασκηνοῦ.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτῶν ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ. Εἰς τὸ Δόξα τῶν Ἀποστίχων τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος ἡ ἀληθινή.*
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῆς Ἁγίας γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου γ΄, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου· Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ὁσίου, Καὶ νῦν Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῆς Ἁγίας, τοῦ Ὁσίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, Τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ οἱ τῶν Ἁγίων· Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῆς Ἁγίας Τὸν νυμφίον σου Χριστὸν ἀγαπήσασα, Δόξα τοῦ Ὁσίου Τὴν τοῦ βίου ἀπάτην, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτοκίον Τὸ ἐξαίσιον θαῦμα, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ

*(Printed Page 236)*

=== LEAF p252 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 30: Concl. of St. Andrew Liturgy / Month of December / December 4: St. Barbara and St. John Damascene (p. 237)]

237

6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the second Canon of the Apostle. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Apostle, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The Virgin today." Apostolos and Gospel of the Apostle. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "To all the earth," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

MONTH OF DECEMBER

The 4th.    The Holy Great-martyr Barbara and our Holy Father John the Damascene.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day except Sunday, their Service is sung according to the order in the Mineon. At the Glory of the Aposticha of Vespers, Now and ever, "Theotokos you are the true vine."*
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of Saint Barbara and 3 of the Righteous {Saint John}, Glory of Saint Barbara, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of Saint John, Now and ever, "My creator and saviour." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of Saint Barbara, of Saint John, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, we do the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Ypakoi of the Mode and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of St. Barbara "Having your bridegroom Christ," Glory of the Righteous Saint "The deceit of this life," Now and ever the Theotokion "Astonishing miracle"; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the

*(Printed Page 237)*

=== LEAF p253 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — December 4: St. Barbara & St. John Damascene Concl. / December 5: St. Savvas the Sanctified (p. 238)]

238

Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῆς Ἁγίας, τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου δ΄ (τὰ εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ), Δόξα, τὸ Ἑωθινὸν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ἁγίας. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἁγίας, τοῦ Ὁσίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Ε΄.    Τοῦ ὁσίου Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Σάββα τοῦ Ἡγιασμένου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ὁσίου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ. Μετὰ τὸ Δόξα τῶν Ἀποστίχων τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ, Καὶ νῦν λέγεται Δέσποινα πρόσδεξαι.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ὁσίου. Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ὁσίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ὁσίου, Καὶ νῦν Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε. Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ὁσίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ὁσίου, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, καὶ ἡ γ΄ Στιχολογία τοῦ Ἁγίου, Τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ὁσίου. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς μετὰ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸν Οἶκον τοῦ Ὁσίου, τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ

*(Printed Page 238)*

=== LEAF p254 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — December 4: St. Barbara & St. John Damascene Concl. / December 5: St. Savvas the Sanctified (p. 239)]

239

Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Saints. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, that of St. Barbara, that of the Righteous Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of Saint John (from the Aposticha of Vespers), Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of Saint Barbara. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, Saint Barbara's or Saint John's, that of the Saint of the Church and Kontakion "The Virgin today." The Apostolos of Saint Barbara and the Gospel of the Sunday, Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 5th.    Our Righteous Father Savvas the Sanctified.

1.    If the commemoration of the Righteous Saint occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon. After the Glory of the Aposticha of Vespers, Now and ever, "Lady, accept."
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, "Unwedded Virgin." The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Saint and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Ypakoi of the Mode and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and the third Stasis [Stichologia] of the Saint. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and that of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, after the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, the Kathisma and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria of the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of

*(Printed Page 239)*

=== LEAF p255 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — December 5: St. Savvas Concl. / December 6: St. Nicholas the Wonderworker (p. 240)]

240

τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινὸν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ὁσίου· Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ὁσίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΣΤ΄.    Τοῦ ἐν ἁγίοις Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Νικολάου ἐπισκόπου Μύρων τῆς Λυκίας τοῦ Θαυματουργοῦ.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν, καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν εἰς ς΄ τὰ Προσόμοια Μύροις παροικήσας αἰσθητῶς 1, Δόξα Ἱεραρχῶν τὴν καλλονὴν, Καὶ νῦν Σπήλαιον εὐτρεπίζου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια, Δόξα Ἄνθρωπε τοῦ Θεοῦ, Καὶ νῦν Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε, πόθεν ἥκεις; Ἀπολυτίκιον Κανόνα πίστεως, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν καὶ τὴν Λιτὴν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Τίμιος ἐναντίον Κυρίου, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα. Δόξα Ταῖς τοῦ Ἱεράρχου, Καὶ νῦν Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Εὖ

1.    Τὰ ἕτερα γ΄ Προσόμοια τὰ πρὸς τὸ Ποίοις εὐφημιῶν οὐ ψάλλονται διὰ τὸν λόγον ὅτι ὁ ποιητὴς αὐτῶν Νικόλαος Μαλαξός. Πρεσβύτερος Πελοποννήσιος καὶ Πρωτοϊερεὺς Ναυπλίου, ζήσας περὶ τὸ 1640, ἀνὴρ δαήμων τοῦ καθ' Ἕλληνας λόγου, ἐξ εὐλαβείας βουληθεὶς γενέσθαι καὶ μελουργὸς καὶ συντάξας ταῦτα, ὡς καὶ τὰ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου πρὸς τὸ Ποίοις εὐφημιῶν, καὶ τὰ τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου πρὸς τὸ Ὁ ἐξ Ὑψίστου κληθεὶς Προσόμοια, ἀπέστειλεν εἰς Ἐνετίαν καὶ συνεννοηθεὶς μετὰ τῶν ἐκεῖ τότε τυπογράφων, κατεχώρισεν αὐτὰ ἐν τοῖς ἐκδοθεῖσι τότε νέοις Μηναίοις αὐθαιρέτῳ γνώμῃ, ἐφ' ᾧ αὐτὸς μὲν παρὰ τῆς τότε ἐν Κωνσταντινουπόλει Ἱερᾶς Συνόδου διεκηρύχθη ὡς καινοτόμος τὰ δὲ ἐκδοθέντα ᾄσματα αὐτοῦ καθωρίσθη ἔκτοτε ἵνα μὴ ψάλλωνται ἐν ταῖς τοῦ Χριστοῦ Ἐκκλησίαις.

*(Printed Page 240)*

=== LEAF p256 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — December 5: St. Savvas Concl. / December 6: St. Nicholas the Wonderworker (p. 241)]

241

the Saint, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The Virgin today," the Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 6th.    Our Father among the Saints Nicholas, Archbishop of Myra in Lycia, the Wonderworker.

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the first Stasis of the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 6 Prosomia Stichira of the Saint1, Glory, "Let us come together," Now and ever, "O Cavern, make ready." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Prosomia Stichira, Glory, "Man of God," Now and ever, "O Groomless Virgin, from where do you come?" The Apolytikion "A rule of faith," the Theotokion, and Dismissal.

2.    In Matins, after Psalm 50 and the Liti, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion twice and the Theotokion once; then the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon "Precious in the Lord." Then "Let all breath" and the Gospel; then Psalm 50 is read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Hierarch," Now and ever, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "Have mercy on me, O God" and the

1. The other three Prosomia to the melody "Who shall we sing" are not sung because their author, Nicholas Malaxos, Presbyter of Peloponnisos and First-priest of Nafplion, who lived around 1640, a man versed in Greek literature, motivated by piety to become a melodist, composed these hymns, as well as hymns with the same melody in the Vespers of Saint Gregory, and of Saint John Chrysostom to the melody "Called from on high." He thereby communicated with Venice and arranged arbitrarily with the printers who were there at the time to have these hymns included in the newly published Minea, by arbitrary decision, wherefore, he was proclaimed by the Synod of Constantinople as an innovator, and it was decided that from that time on that the published hymns were not to be chanted in the Churches of Christ.

*(Printed Page 241)*

=== LEAF p257 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — December 6: St. Nicholas the Wonderworker Cont. & Sunday Concurrence (p. 242)]

242

δοῦλε ἀγαθὲ καὶ πιστέ. Κανόνες ὁ τῆς Θεοτόκου ᾨδὴν ἐπινίκιον, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἀπόρῳ γλώττῃ καὶ χείλεσιν, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄, Δόξα Σαλπίσωμεν ἐν σάλπιγγι ᾀσμάτων, Καὶ νῦν Μακαρίζομέν σε [εἰς τὴν Παρακλητικήν, Ἑσπερινὸς Δευτέρας, ἦχος πλ. α΄], Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου ς΄ τὰ Μύροις παροικήσας, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε, πόθεν ἥκεις; Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Καθίσματα λέγονται εἰς τὰς δύο πρώτας στιχολογίας μετὰ τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων· εἰς δὲ τὴν γ΄ στιχολογίαν τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν Τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄. Δόξα, Σαλπίσωμεν ἐν σάλπιγγι ᾀσμάτων, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη,

*(Printed Page 242)*

=== LEAF p258 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — December 6: St. Nicholas the Wonderworker Cont. & Sunday Concurrence (p. 243)]

243

Idiomelon "Well done, O good and faithful servant." The Canons of the Theotokos "A song of victory" and of the Saint "Difficult to tongue and lips." After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, and the Minologion of the Saint. The Katavasie "Christ is born," then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Prosomia of the Saint, Glory "Let us blow the trumpets of praise," Now and ever, "We praise you" {to be found in the Paraklitiki: Vespers of Monday evening, Mode I Plagal}, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, hymns from the 3rd and 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The Virgin today." Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "In memorial" "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
4.    If the Feast of St. Nicholas occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint "Having dwelt in myrrh," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, "O Groomless Virgin, from where do you come?" The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Saint and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos of the Saint. Kathismata in the first two Stichologie are said thus: after the Resurrection, we do one of the Saint and the Theotokion; in the 3rd Stichologia we do the Saint's Kathisma and the Theotokion. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection (read), the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection and of the Saint, and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint "Let us blow the trumpet of praise," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

*(Printed Page 243)*

=== LEAF p259 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — December 6: St. Nicholas Concl. / December 9: Conception of St. Anna & Dedication of the Resurrection Church (p. 244)]

244

Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Θ΄.    Ἡ σύλληψις τῆς ἁγίας Ἄννης τῆς μητρὸς τῆς Θεοτόκου, καὶ ἡ ἀνάμνησις τῶν Ἐγκαινίων [τοῦ Ναοῦ τῆς Ἀναστάσεως εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα].

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Ἁγίας μετὰ τῆς τῶν Ἐγκαινίων ψάλλονται ὡς εἰσι διατεταγμέναι ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄. Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας Τὸ ἀπόρρητον τοῖς Ἀγγέλοις, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν τῆς Ἁγίας Σήμερον ἐκ ῥίζης τοῦ Δαβίδ, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας Σήμερον τῆς ἀτεκνίας δεσμὰ διαλύονται ἅπαξ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς, καὶ τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας ἅπαξ· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ δύο ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἓν τῆς Ἁγίας Ὁ νέος οὐρανὸς, αὖθις δύο Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας Ἀναβόησον Δαυίδ· εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἁγίας Τὴν σύλληψιν σήμερον. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα Χορὸς προφητικός, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Ἰωακεὶμ ὁ Ἱερεὺς καὶ ἡ Ἄννα. Ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Πάντες τ' Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας Εἰσήκουσε τοὺς στεναγμοὺς ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ δ΄ τῆς

*(Printed Page 244)*

=== LEAF p260 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — December 6: St. Nicholas Concl. / December 9: Conception of St. Anna & Dedication of the Resurrection Church (p. 245)]

245

6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The Virgin today." The Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 9th.    The Conception of Saint Anna, the Mother of the Theotokos, and Commemoration of the Consecration [of the Church of the Resurrection in Jerusalem].

1.    If the Feast occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service of Saint Anna together with that of the Consecration is sung according to the order in the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of Saint Anna. Glory of the Saint "That which is inexpressible to Angels," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "Today from the root of David." The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Saint "Today the bonds of barrenness are loosed" once, and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic "It is meet"; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion twice, and the Saint's once; then the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos; the 2 Resurrection Kathismata and the Saint's "The new heaven" then 2 Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Saint's "Cry out, David"; then the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saint "Your conception today." After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma "Prophetic chorus," Glory, Now and ever, "Joachim the Priest and Anna." After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Saints. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, and of the Saint "He heard your sighing" once. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint "Confide Adam," Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most

*(Printed Page 245)*
