=== LEAF p651 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Apodosis of the Transfiguration (August 13, Concl.); Forefeast of the Dormition and Prophet Micah (August 14, §§ 1–3) (p. 636)]

636

ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς.
Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ τόκος σου, ἄφθορος, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς
ἑορτῆς, Μετεμορφώθης ἐν τῷ ὄρει, ᾿Απόλυσις καὶ ᾿Απόδοσις.

Τῇ ΙΔ΄.    Τὰ Προεόρτια τῆς Κοιμήσεως τῆς Ὑπεραγίας
Θεοτόκου, καὶ τοῦ Προφήτου Μιχαίου.

1.    Ἐὰν τύχωσι τὰ Προεόρτια ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ὁ
προεόρτιος Ἑσπερινὸς (καὶ μετ᾿ αὐτόν, ἐννοεῖται, ἡ τελευταία
Παράκλησις), καὶ τὸ πρωῒ ὁ Ὄρθρος μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας ψάλλονται
κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν.
2.    Ἐὰν τύχωσιν ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ᾿Αναστάσιμα
ς΄ καὶ Προεόρτια δ΄, Δόξα, Τὴν πάνσεπτόν σου Κοίμησιν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ
α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς
τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἡ τῶν
οὐρανῶν ὑψηλοτέρα, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον
ἅπαξ, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

      Ἡ δὲ ᾿Ακολουθία τοῦ Προφήτου Μιχαίου ἐν τοῖς ᾿Αποδείπνοις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ, εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ
Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον,
τὸ προεόρτιον ᾿Απολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος.    Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον ἅπαξ,
εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ
ἀντὶ τῶν θεοτοκίων τῆς Ὀκτωήχου τὰ Προεόρτια, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια,
ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες,
ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος μετὰ Στίχου Ὑπεραγία
Θεοτόκε· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ προεόρτιον Κάθισμα ἅπαξ, ἀφ᾿ ς΄
Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ ᾿Αναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ
Καταβασίαι ᾿Ανοίξω τὸ στόμα μου . . . τὸ τέλος ταύτης τὴν
Κοίμησιν, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον
καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Σοῦ τῆς σεπτῆς Κοιμήσεως ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ Προεόρτια δ΄ Δῆμος τῶν μαθητῶν,
Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη,

*(Printed Page 636)*

=== LEAF p652 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Apodosis of the Transfiguration (August 13, Concl.); Forefeast of the Dormition and Prophet Micah (August 14, §§ 1–3) (p. 637)]

637

the Resurrection, of the Feast, and the Kontakion. Apostolos and Gospel of
the Sunday. At “Especially,” “Your birth-giving was shown to be
undefiled,” Communion Hymn of the Feast, the Apolytikion “You were
transfigured upon the mountain,” and Dismissal.

The 14th    The Pre-feast of the Dormition of the Most-holy
Theotokos, and the Prophet Micah.

1.    If the Pre-feast of the Dormition occurs on any day except Sunday,
the Vespers of the Pre-feast (and with it, it is understood, the last Paraklisis),
and in the morning Matins with the Liturgy are sung according to the order
of the Mineon.
2.    If the Pre-feast occurs on a Sunday, Saturday at Vespers, following
the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6
Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Pre-feast. Glory, “Your all-
venerable Dormition,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode.
Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “She who is higher than the
heavens.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Pre-feast (once), and
Dismissal.
      The Service of the Prophet Micah is chanted at Compline.

3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast and
the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion twice
and that of the Pre-feast once, then the Psalter and the Amomos. The
Resurrection Kathismata in order, and, in place of the Theotokia of the
Octoichos, we do those of the Pre-feast. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the
Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrec-
tion and of the Pre-feast with the Verse “Most Holy Theotokos.” After the
3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Pre-feast (once); after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie
“I shall open my mouth . . . ,” with the ending “her Dormition,” and the
entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.”
Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection and of the Pre-feast “Celebrating the
radiant memorial of your holy Dormition” (once). At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Pre-feast “The community of the
disciples,” Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great
Doxology and “Today salvation.”

*(Printed Page 637)*

=== LEAF p653 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: Forefeast of the Dormition (August 14, Concl. § 4); The Dormition of the Most Holy Lady Theotokos (August 15, §§ 1–2) (p. 638)]

638

καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς
δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Προεορτίου Κανόνος δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον,
τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ,
Κοντάκιον Τῇ ἐνδόξῳ μνήμῃ σου.    ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς
Κυριακῆς.    Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε,
Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙΕ΄.    Ἡ Κοίμησις τῆς Ὑπεραγίας Δεσποίνης ἡμῶν
Θεοτόκου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν
τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ Προσόμοια Ὢ τοῦ
παραδόξου θαύματος εἰς ς΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Θεαρχίῳ νεύματι,
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ ᾿Αναγνώσματα.
Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὅτε ἐξεδήμησας,
τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον [Ἐν τῇ γεννήσει] ἐκ γ΄ καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

2.    Τὸ πρωῒ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τοῦ Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα
τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος.    Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον ἐκ γ΄, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος
Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία μου, τὰ Καθίσματα ἐκ β΄, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄
᾿Αντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός
σου, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον ᾿Αναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, εἶτα
ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό,
ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον    Ὅτε ἡ
μετάστασις, οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι μετὰ τοῦ Στίχου Ὑπεραγία
Θεοτόκε· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοή, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος
καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Πεποικιλμένη τῇ θείᾳ δόξῃ
, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων· εἰς μὲν τὸν
α΄ Κανόνα τὸ Αἱ γενεαὶ πᾶσαι μακαρίζομέν σε, τὴν μόνην
Θεοτόκον, εἰς δὲ τὸν β΄ τὸ Ἄγγελοι τὴν Κοίμησιν τῆς
Παρθένου, ὁρῶντες ἐξεπλήττοντο, πῶς ἡ Παρθένος ἀπαίρει
ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς εἰς τὰ ἄνω, καὶ ἡ Καταβασία Αἱ γενεαὶ πᾶσαι

------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Εὐθὺς μετὰ τὴν Καταβασίαν τῆς θ΄ συνηθίζεται ἐνιαχοῦ, ὅπου πανηγυρίζεται ἡ ἑορτὴ
αὕτη μεγαλοπρεπῶς, πρὸς πλείονα τάχα δόξαν καὶ τιμὴν τῆς Θεοτόκου, ἵνα ψάλλωνται
τὰ λεγόμενα ἐγκώμια τῆς Παναγίας, κατὰ μίμησιν τῶν τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν, τῶν ψαλλομένων
ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ τοῦ Μ. Σαββάτου. Ἡ Μ. Ἐκκλησία κατακρίνουσα πᾶν ὅ, τι καινοφανὲς καὶ
κακόζηλον, ἔστω καὶ γινόμενον πρὸς τιμὴν τῆς Θεοτόκου ἀποδοκιμάζει ταῦτα ἐπισήμως
καὶ ἀπαγορεύει μάλιστα αὐστηρῶς.

*(Printed Page 638)*

=== LEAF p654 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: Forefeast of the Dormition (August 14, Concl. § 4); The Dormition of the Most Holy Lady Theotokos (August 15, §§ 1–2) (p. 639)]

639

4.    In the Liturgy are sung the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and
4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance,
the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Pre-feast, that of the Saint of the
Church, and the Kontakion “At your glorious memorial,” Apostolos and
Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn
“Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 15th    Feast of the Dormition of our Most-holy Lady
Theotokos.

1.    In Great Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I
have cried” we sing the Prosomia “O, of the marvellous wonder!” (in 6).
Glory, Now and ever, “By the royal command of God.” Entrance, “O
Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the
Aposticha: the three Idiomela, Glory, Now and ever, “When you departed
from this life.” The Apolytikion [“In giving birth”] three times and
Dismissal
2.    In the morning at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti; then the
Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the
Apolytikion three times, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos “My heart has
uttered a good word.” The Kathismata (twice each), the Anavathmi of the
First Antiphon of Mode IV, and the Prokimenon “I shall remember your
name.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Gospel “Mary having
arisen,” Psalm 50 read, Glory, “Through the intercessions of the
Theotokos,” Now and ever; repeat the same. The Verse “Have mercy on
me, O God” and the Idiomelon “When the translation to heaven.” Then
the Canons with the Verse “Most Holy Theotokos.” After the 3rd Ode, the
Ypakoi; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos and the Minologion. The
Katavasie “Adorned with divine glory.” Then the 9th Ode with the
Megolynaria: for the First Canon we chant “All the generations bless you,
the only Theotokos”; for the Second Canon we chant “The angels, as they
looked upon the Dormition of the Virgin, were struck with wonder at how
the Virgin went up from earth to heaven,” and the Katavasia “All
generations . . . The laws of nature are overcome.”*⁴ The Exapostilarion

------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. In some churches, especially where the Feast of the Dormition is celebrated with added
magnificence, it has become customary, supposedly for the greater glory and honor of the
Theotokos, to sing immediately after the Katavasia of the 9th Ode the so-called Engomia
[Verses of Praise] of the All-holy One. This is done in emulation of the Engomia of our Lord,
which are sung at the Matins of Great [Holy] Saturday. Censuring any work that strains to appear
innovative and that mimics with bad taste a preexisting work — even though this is done in honor
of the Theotokos, as in this instance — the Great Church officially disapproves of all such
imitations and, in fact, sternly forbids their use.

*(Printed Page 639)*

=== LEAF p655 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Dormition of the Most Holy Lady Theotokos (August 15, Concl. § 2, § 3 Antiphons 1–3 & Entrance) (p. 640)]

640

. . . Νενίκηνται τῆς φύσεως οἱ ὅροι⁴, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τρίς.
Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τῇ
ἀθανάτῳ σου Κοιμήσει, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἐν τῇ
Γεννήσει.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ ᾿Αντίφωνα.

᾿Αντίφωνον Α΄.

      ᾿Αλαλάξατε τῷ Κυρίῳ πᾶσα ἡ γῆ.
      Ἐξομολογεῖσθε αὐτῷ, αἰνεῖτε τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ.
      Ἐν πόλει Κυρίου τῶν δυνάμεων ἐν πόλει τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡμῶν.
      Ἐγενήθη ἐν εἰρήνῃ ὁ τόπος αὐτοῦ, καὶ τὸ κατοικητήριον αὐτοῦ ἐν Σιών.
      [Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου, Σῶτερ, σῶσον ἡμᾶς.]

᾿Αντίφωνον Β΄.

      ᾿Αγαπᾷ Κύριος τὰς πύλας Σιών, ὑπὲρ πάντα τὰ σκηνώματα Ἰακώβ.
      Δεδοξασμένα ἐλαλήθη περὶ σοῦ, ἡ πόλις τοῦ Θεοῦ.
      Ὁ Θεὸς ἐθεμελίωσεν αὐτὴν εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα.
      {Ἡγίασε τὸ σκήνωμα αὑτοῦ ὁ Ὕψιστος}
      Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ μονογενὴς Υἱὸς κτλ.
      [Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, ψάλλοντάς σοι· ᾿Αλληλούϊα.]

᾿Αντίφωνον Γ΄.

      Ἑτοίμη ἡ καρδία μου, ὁ Θεός, ἑτοίμη ἡ καρδία μου.
      Τί ἀνταποδώσω τῷ Κυρίῳ περὶ πάντων, ὧν ἀνταπέδωκέ μοι;
      Ποτήριον σωτηρίου λήψομαι καὶ τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου ἐπικαλέσομαι.
      [Ἐν τῇ Γεννήσει τὴν παρθενίαν...]

      Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Ἐν τῇ Γεννήσει καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Τὴν ἐν πρεσβείαις ἀκοίμητον, ὁ

*(Printed Page 640)*

=== LEAF p656 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Dormition of the Most Holy Lady Theotokos (August 15, Concl. § 2, § 3 Antiphons 1–3 & Entrance) (p. 641)]

641

(thrice). At the Praises: the three Prosomia in 4, Glory, Now and ever, “At
your deathless Dormition,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion “In
giving birth”.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

ANTIPHON ONE

Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth. Confess Him, praise His name.
In the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God.
His sanctuary is in peace: and His dwelling in Zion.
[Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, Savior, save us.]

ANTIPHON TWO

The Lord loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
Glorious things are spoken of you, O city of God.
God has established her for ever.
{The Most High has sanctified His tabernacle.}
[Son of God, wondrous in Your saints, save us who sing to You: Alleluia.]

Glory, [to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit,] now and
ever [and unto ages of ages. Amen.] O Only-begotten Son and
Word of God...

ANTIPHON THREE

My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward me?
I will receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.
[In giving birth, your virginity...]

After the Entrance, the Apolytikion “In giving birth” and the
Kontakion “Neither the tomb nor death.” The Apostolos, and the Gospel

*(Printed Page 641)*

=== LEAF p657 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Dormition of the Most Holy Lady Theotokos (August 15, Concl. § 3, Sunday Concurrence §§ 4–6) (p. 642)]

642

᾿Απόστολος, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Εἰσῆλθεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἰς
κώμην τινά.    Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Αἱ γενεαὶ πᾶσαι . . .
Νενίκηνται τῆς φύσεως οἱ ὅροι.    Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον.
Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ
τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς τὰ Προσόμοια εἰς ς΄, Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Θεαρχίῳ νεύματι.    Εἴσοδος,    Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ
Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ ᾿Αναγνώσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα,
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὅτε ἐξεδήμησας. Τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν
καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
᾿Απολυτίκιον Ἐν τῇ Γεννήσει, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος,
τὰ ᾿Απολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος
Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία μου.    Εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν Καθίσματα
᾿Αναστάσιμα β΄ καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ᾿Αναβόησον Δαβίδ· εἰς τὴν β΄ αὖθις
᾿Αναστάσιμα β΄ καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὁ πάντιμος χορός, τὸ δὲ γ΄ Κάθισμα
τῆς ἑορτῆς ἐκ δευτέρου, ἡ Αἴτησις, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ
τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἑορτῆς, Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός σου, τὸ Πᾶσα
πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον ᾿Αναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, τὸ ᾿Ανάστασιν Χριστοῦ
καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὁ
Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ὅτε ἡ μετάστασις.
Κανόνες ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ οἱ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου καὶ ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Μακαρίζομέν σε πᾶσαι αἱ
γενεαὶ χῦμα· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον,
αἱ Καταβασίαι Πεποικιλμένη τῇ θείᾳ δόξῃ· εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς
μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ τῆς
ἑορτῆς δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄. Δόξα,
Τῇ ἀθανάτῳ σου κοιμήσει,    Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ ᾿Αντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἰς τὸ β΄ ᾿Αντίφωνον
Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν.    Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν
. . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς,
καὶ Κοντάκιον Τὴν ἐν πρεσβείαις, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.
Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Αἱ γενεαὶ πᾶσαι . . . Νενίκηνται τῆς
φύσεως οἱ ὅροι, Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, καὶ

*(Printed Page 642)*

=== LEAF p658 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Dormition of the Most Holy Lady Theotokos (August 15, Concl. § 3, Sunday Concurrence §§ 4–6) (p. 643)]

643

“Jesus entered a certain village.” At “Especially,” “All generations . .
. The laws of nature are overcome.” Communion Hymn “[I will receive]
the cup,” “We have seen the [true] Light” and Dismissal.
4.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, Saturday evening, at Great Vespers
following the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4
Resurrection Stichira and the Prosomia of the Feast (in 6). Glory, Now and
ever, “By the royal command of God.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the
Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrec-
tion Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “When you departed from this life.”
The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection (once) and of the Feast (twice), and
Dismissal
5.    Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Liti
and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “In giving
birth” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in
Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos “My heart has uttered a good
word.” At the Kathismata of the First Stasis [Stichologia]: two of the
Resurrection and that of the Feast “Cry out, O David”; at the Second Stasis:
two of the Resurrection and that of the Feast “The all-honorable chorus”;
then the Third Kathisma of the Feast (twice), the Petition, the Ypakoi, the
Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon of the Feast “I shall remem-
ber your name.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Gospel
“Mary having arisen.” Then “Having beheld the Resurrection,” Psalm 50
read, Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” Now and ever,
repeat the same. The Verse “Have mercy on me, O God” and the Idiomelon
“When the translation to heaven.” Then the Canons of the Resurrection
and the two of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the
Resurrection and the Ypakoi “All generations call you blessed” (read);
after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast and the Minologion.
The Katavasie “Adorned with divine glory,” then the 9th Ode of the Feast
with the Megalynaria. The Resurrection Exapostilarion and that of the
Feast (twice). At the Praises: the 4 hymns of the Resurrection and 4 of the
Feast, Glory, Now and ever, “At your deathless Dormition,” Great Doxol-
ogy and “Today salvation.”
6.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, and at the 2nd Antiphon
“who is risen from the dead.” At the Entrance, “Come let us worship . . .
who is risen from the dead.” After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the
Resurrection, of the Feast, and the Kontakion “Neither the tomb nor
death”; the Apostolos and the Gospel of the Feast. At “Especially,” “All
generations . . . The laws of nature are overcome.” Communion Hymn “[I

*(Printed Page 643)*

=== LEAF p659 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of August: The Dormition (August 15, Concl. § 6); Transfer of the Holy Mandylion and Martyr Diomedes (August 16, §§ 7–10) (p. 644)]

644

᾿Απόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙϚ΄.    Ἡ ἐξ Ἐδέσσης ἀνακομιδὴ τῆς ἀχειροποιήτου
Εἰκόνος, ἤτοι τοῦ ἁγίου Μανδηλίου, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Διομήδους.

7.    Τῇ ΙΕ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια τοῦ ἁγίου Μανδηλίου,
καὶ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς (τὰ τοῦ μικροῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ), Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Δεῦτε
τὴν παγκόσμιον κοίμησιν. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον
τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ τῆς σειρᾶς Δῆμος τῶν μαθητῶν,
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον, ᾿Απολυτίκια Τὴν ἄχραντον Εἰκόνα σου, Ἐν
τῇ Γεννήσει καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

8.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν, ὁ Κανὼν
τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ ἁγίου Μανδηλίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Πεποικιλμένη
τῇ θείᾳ δόξῃ, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς σειρᾶς δίς.
Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ γ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ ἁγίου
Μανδηλίου Ποίοις οἱ γηγενεῖς ὄμμασιν εἰς δ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἡ τῶν
οὐρανῶν ὑψηλοτέρα (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν). Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ
τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Τὴν ἄχραντον Εἰκόνα σου.
9.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια
ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ ἁγίου Μανδηλίου. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, Τὴν ἄχραντον εἰκόνα σου, Ἐν τῇ Γεννήσει, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ
Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τὴν ἐν πρεσβείαις, ὁ ᾿Απόστολος (ζήτει
Σαββάτῳ πρὸ τῶν Φώτων), καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ
, ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ συμπληροῦσθαι,    Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ
᾿Απόλυσις.
10.   Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακόν, καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ ἁγίου Μανδηλίου γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς (τὰ τοῦ μικροῦ
Ἑσπερινοῦ), Δόξα, Δεῦτε φιλεόρτων τὸ σύστημα (ζήτει εἰς τὴν
Λιτὴν τῆς ἑορτῆς), Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς
ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.    Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἄσατε λαοί (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, Τὴν ἄχραντον Εἰκόνα σου, Ἐν τῇ
Γεννήσει καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 644)*

=== LEAF p660 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of August: The Dormition (August 15, Concl. § 6); Transfer of the Holy Mandylion and Martyr Diomedes (August 16, §§ 7–11) (p. 645)]

645

will receive] the cup,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 16th    Transfer of the Icon not made by human hands
(that is, of the Holy Veil) from Edessa; the Holy Martyr Diomidis.

7.    On August 15, at Great Vespers following the Introductory Psalm
at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the three Stichira Prosomia of the
Mandylion (Holy Veil), and three of the Feast (from Small Vespers), Glory,
Now and ever, “Come, let us celebrate.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light”
and the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the three hymns of the
sequence “The community of the disciples,” Glory, Now and ever of the
Post-feast. Apolytikia: “Your most pure image,” “In giving birth,” and
Dismissal
8.    In Matins, after the Midnight Service, Psalm 50, the Exapsalmos
and the rest of the service according to the order of the Mineon, the Canon
of the Feast and that of the Holy Veil. The Katavasie “Adorned in divine
glory,” and then “More honorable”; the Exapostilarion of the sequence
twice. At the Praises: the three Prosomia of the Holy Veil “With what eyes”
in 4, Glory, Now and ever, “She who is higher than the heavens” (see the
Liti), Great Doxology and the Apolytikion “Your most pure image.”
9.    In the Liturgy are sung the Typika and Beatitudes and 4 hymns from
the 3rd and 6th Ode of the Canon of the Holy Mandylion. After the Entrance
the Apolytikia: “Your most pure image,” “In giving birth,” of the Saint of
the Church, and the Kontakion “Neither the tomb nor death.” Apostolos
(see Saturday before Epiphany), and the Gospel “Not long before it was
time.” At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise [the
Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.
10.   If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, Saturday evening at Great Vespers,
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,”
we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira and three of the Holy Veil and three of the
Feast (of the Small Vespers), Glory, “Come, you feast lovers” (see the Liti
of the Feast), Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O
Gladsome Light,” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection
Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “Sing, O people!” (see the Liti). The
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, “Your most pure image,” “In giving
birth,” and Dismissal.
11.   Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic

*(Printed Page 645)*
