=== LEAF p121 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Megalynarion (cont.), Concerning the Communion Hymn (p. 106)]

106

τιμιωτέραν στιχολογοῦμεν νῦν· ἐξαίρεσις γίνεται ὅταν συμπέσῃ ἡ τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου μνήμη τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς τοῦ Θωμᾶ ἑορτῆς, καὶ τῇ ἑορτῇ ἢ Ἀποδόσει τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, ὅτε ψάλλεται ἡ Καταβασία τῆς Θ΄ ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΚΟΙΝΩΝΙΚΟΥ

46.    Τὸ Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον ψάλλεται ἐν ταῖς τῶν Κυριακῶν ἱεραῖς Λειτουργίαις, ἂν μὴ συμπίπτῃ ταύταις Θεομητορικὴ ἑορτὴ ἢ Ἀπόδοσις Δεσποτικῆς ἑορτῆς ἢ Θεομητορικῆς. Ψάλλεται ὡσαύτως καὶ ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τῆς Περιτομῆς τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἐν οἵᾳ ἂν ἡμέρᾳ τύχῃ ἡ ἑορτή, ὡς καὶ ἐν ταῖς παραμοναῖς τῶν Χριστουγέννων καὶ τῶν Θεοφανείων, ὅτε συνεχίζονται αἱ ὧραι μετὰ τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ καὶ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου. Ἐν ταῖς Δεσποτικαῖς ἑορταῖς καὶ ἐν ταῖς Ἀποδόσεσιν αὐτῶν, ἐν οἱᾳδήποτε ἡμέρᾳ καὶ ἂν τύχωσι, ψάλλονται τὰ ἑκάστῃ ὡρισμένα Κοινωνικά, ἐν δὲ ταῖς Θεομητορικαῖς καὶ τῇ Α΄ τῆς Ἰνδίκτου (ἐξαιρουμένου τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ, ὅτε ψάλλεται τὸ Ἐξελέξατο Κύριος τὴν Σιών) καὶ Κυριακὴ ἂν τύχῃ, ψάλλεται τὸ Ποτήριον σωτηρίου λήψομαι. Ὅταν αἱ μνῆμαι τῶν ἑξῆς Ἁγίων συμπέσωσι Κυριακῇ, ἀντὶ τοῦ Αἰνεῖτε, ψάλλονται ἄλλα Κοινωνικὰ τὰ χαρακτηρίζοντα ἕκαστον· ὡς ἐν ταῖς τρισὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου ἑορταῖς τὸ Εἰς μνημόσυνον αἰώνιον, ἐν ταῖς τῶν Πρωτοκορυφαίων Ἀποστόλων, ὡς καὶ τῶν ιβ΄, ἐν ταῖς τῶν τεσσάρων Εὐαγγελιστῶν, ἐν τῇ τοῦ ἀποστόλου Ἀνδρέου, ἐν τῇ τῶν τριῶν Ἱεραρχῶν καὶ ἐν τῇ τῶν ἁγίων Κωνσταντίνου καὶ Ἑλένης, τὸ Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν· ἐν τῇ τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν τὸ Ὁ ποιῶν τοὺς Ἀγγέλους· τῇ δὲ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν τὸ Ἐσημειώθη ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς, ὡς καὶ τῇ α΄ τοῦ Αὐγούστου (ἂν μὴ συμπέσῃ Κυριακή.) Ἐν ταῖς μετὰ τὴν Κυριακὴν τοῦ Θωμᾶ τέσσαρσι Κυριακαῖς τὸ Σῶμα Χριστοῦ· καὶ ἐν τῇ τῶν ἁγίων Πάντων Κυριακῇ καὶ ταῖς μνήμαις τῶν Θεοπατόρων Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ Ἄννης τὸ Ἀγαλλιᾶσθε δίκαιοι. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς καθημεριναῖς, καὶ ταῖς μεταξὺ τῶν μεθεόρτων ἡμερῶν τελουμέναις Ἱεραῖς Λειτουργίαις (ἐκτὸς τῶν ἡμερῶν τῶν Ἀποδόσεων) ψάλλονται τὰ τῆς ἑβδομάδος Κοινωνικά, τῇ Δευτέρᾳ Ὁ ποιῶν τοὺς Ἀγγέλους αὐτοῦ πνεύματα καὶ τοὺς λειτουργοὺς αὐτοῦ πυρὸς φλόγα· τῇ Τρίτῃ Εἰς μνημόσυνον αἰώνιον ἔσται δίκαιος· τῇ Τετάρτῃ Ποτήριον σωτηρίου λήψομαι καὶ τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου ἐπικαλέσομαι· τῇ Πέμπτῃ Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν ἐξῆλθεν ὁ φθόγγος αὐτῶν, καὶ εἰς τὰ πέρατα τῆς οἰκουμένης τὰ

*(Printed Page 106)*

=== LEAF p122 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Megalynarion (cont.), Concerning the Communion Hymn (p. 107)]

107

honorable" with its verses. Exception is made when the commemoration of a Saint occurs on the Saturday of the Leave-taking of Thomas, and on the Feast or Leave-taking of Mid-Pentecost, when the Katavasia of the Ninth Ode is chanted instead of "It is meet and right."

CONCERNING THE COMMUNION {HYMN}

46.    The Communion Hymn "Praise the Lord from the highest" is sung in the Divine Liturgies of Sundays, if no Feast of the Theotokos or the Leave-taking of a Feast of the Lord or Theotokos occurs with them. It is also sung on the Feast of the Circumcision of the Savior no matter on which day the Feast occurs, as well as on the Eves of Christmas and Theophany, when the Hours are followed by the Vespers with the Liturgy of Basil the Great. On the Feasts of the Lord and their Leave-takings, no matter on which day they occur, are sung the Communion Hymns prescribed for the Feast. On the Feasts of the Theotokos and the Feast of the Indiction [September 1] (excluding the Annunciation, when we sing "The Lord has chosen Zion"), even if these Feasts occur on a Sunday, we sing "I will receive the cup of salvation." When the commemorations of the following Saints occur on Sundays, instead of "Praise," other Communion Hymns characteristic of each Feast are sung. On the three Feasts of the Forerunner: "The just shall be remembered forever"; on the Feast of the Most Eminent Apostles, the Twelve Apostles, the Four Evangelists, the Apostle Andrew, the Three Hierarchs, and Saints Constantine and Helen: "Their voice has gone forth over the whole world"; on the Feast of the Archangels: "You make your angels like winds"; on the Third Sunday of Lent as well as on August 1 (if the latter does not occur on a Sunday): "The light of Your countenance was marked upon us, O Lord." On the four Sundays following the Sunday of Thomas: "Receive the body of Christ"; on the Sunday of All Saints and the Feast of the Ancestors of Christ Joachim and Anna: "Rejoice in the Lord, O you just!" In Liturgies performed on weekdays and on the Post-feast days {i.e. the days between a Feast and its Leave-taking} (with the exception of the very days of the Leave-takings themselves), these Communion Hymns of the day are sung. Monday: "You make your angels like winds, and your ministers like blazing fires." Tuesday: "The just shall be remembered forever." Wednesday: "I will receive the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord." Thursday: "Their voice has gone forth over the whole world, and their words to the limits of the universe." Friday: "O

*(Printed Page 107)*

=== LEAF p123 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Communion Hymn (cont.), Concerning We Have Seen the True Light, Concerning Blessed is the Name of the Lord (p. 108)]

108

ῥήματα αὐτῶν· τῇ Παρασκευῇ Σωτηρίαν εἰργάσω ἐν μέσῳ τῆς γῆς, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω καὶ προσελάβου Κύριε, καὶ τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτῶν εἰς γενεὰν καὶ γενεάν. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς Προηγιασμέναις Λειτουργίαις ψάλλεται τὸ Γεύσασθε καὶ ἴδετε ὅτι χρηστὸς ὁ Κύριος, ἐκτὸς ἂν τύχῃ ἑορταζόμενος Ἅγιος, ὅτε ἀντὶ τοῦ Γεύσασθε ψάλλεται τὸ Εἰς μνημόσυνον. Σημειωτέον ὅτι κἂν ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ συμπέσῃ τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων, τῇ Μ. Πέμπτῃ, ὡς καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις ἡμέραις τῆς Διακαινησίμου ἑβδομάδος, πλὴν τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Πάσχα, Κοινωνικὸν ψάλλεται τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἐξελέξατο Κύριος τὴν Σιών.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΕΙΔΟΜΕΝ ΤΟ ΦΩΣ

47.    Ἐν ἑκάστῃ Λειτουργίᾳ, καὶ Θεομητορικὴ ἑορτὴ ἐὰν ᾖ, μετὰ τὸ εἰπεῖν τὸν Διάκονον τὸ Μετὰ φόβου Θεοῦ καὶ τὸν Ἱερέα Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν σου, ψάλλεται εἰς ἦχον β΄ τὸ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς Δεσποτικαῖς ἑορταῖς καὶ ταῖς Ἀποδόσεσιν αὐτῶν, τῇ Γ΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, ἀντὶ τούτου ψάλλονται τὰ τῶν ἑορτῶν Ἀπολυτίκια. Τῇ Μ. Πέμπτῃ τὸ Τροπάριον Τοῦ δείπνου σου τοῦ μυστικοῦ χῦμα· τῷ Μ. Σαββάτῳ τὸ Μνήσθητι εὔσπλαγχνε καὶ ἡμῶν καθὼς ἐμνημόνευσας τοῦ λῃστοῦ ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τῶν οὐρανῶν εἰς ἦχον β΄ εἱρμολογικῶς. Ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Πάσχα μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως, καθ' ἑκάστην ψάλλεται τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς Ἀναλήψεως μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τὸ Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ. Τῷ πρὸ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς Σαββάτῳ ἀντὶ τοῦ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς τὸ Ὁ βάθει σοφίας. Τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Χριστέ, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς Δευτέρας τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος καὶ ἐφεξῆς τὸ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς Προηγιασμέναις Λειτουργίαις ἀντὶ τοῦ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς λέγεται τὸ Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΕΙΗ ΤΟ ΟΝΟΜΑ ΚΥΡΙΟΥ

48.    Τὸ Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου ψάλλεται πάντοτε εἰς ἦχον β' χῦμα

*(Printed Page 108)*

=== LEAF p124 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning the Communion Hymn (cont.), Concerning We Have Seen the True Light, Concerning Blessed is the Name of the Lord (p. 109)]

109

Christ God, You brought about salvation in the midst of the earth." Saturday: "Blessed are they whom You have chosen and taken to Yourself, O Lord, and their memorial is from generation to generation." In the Liturgies of the Presanctified Gifts, we sing "Taste and see that Christ, the Lord, is good," unless there is a commemoration of a celebrating Saint, when we sing "The just shall be remembered forever." Note that, if the Feast of the Annunciation occurs on the Third Sunday of Lent, the Saturday of Lazarus, Palm Sunday, Holy Thursday, as well as on the other days of Bright Week, except Easter Sunday, we sing the Communion Hymn of the Feast "The Lord has chosen Zion."

CONCERNING "WE HAVE SEEN THE [TRUE] LIGHT"

47.    In every Liturgy, even if it is on a Feast of the Theotokos, after the Deacon has said "With the fear of God, with faith and with love draw near," and the Priest "O God, save your people and bless your inheritance," the Hymn "We have seen the [true] light" is sung in Mode Two. On the Lord's Feasts and their Leave-takings, the Third Sunday of Lent, and the Saturday of Lazarus, instead of this hymn we sing the Apolytikia of the Feasts. On Holy Thursday: the hymn "Receive me now, O Son of God"; on Holy Saturday: "Remember us O merciful One, as You did remember the thief in the kingdom of Heaven." From Easter Sunday until its Leave-taking "Christ is risen" is sung every day; and from the Feast of the Ascension until its Leave-taking, we chant "You ascended in glory." On the Saturday before Pentecost: "The depth of wisdom." On the Sunday of Pentecost: "Blessed are You O Christ"; from Monday of the Holy Spirit on: "We have seen the [true] light." In the Liturgies of the Presanctified Gifts, instead of "We have seen the [true] light," we sing "I will bless the Lord at all times."

CONCERNING "BLESSED IS THE NAME OF THE LORD"

48.    "Blessed is the Name of the Lord" is always chanted in Mode II in

*(Printed Page 109)*

=== LEAF p125 ===
[Original Greek Text: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning Blessed is the Name of the Lord (cont.), Concerning The Blessing of the Lord, Concerning Through the Prayers (p. 110)]

110

καὶ ἐν ταῖς τρισὶ Λειτουργίαις, τῇ Προηγιασμένῃ, τῇ τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου καὶ τῇ τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, μετὰ τὴν Ὀπισθάμβωνον εὐχήν. Μόνον ἐν τῇ Διακαινησίμῳ ἑβδομάδι καὶ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς τοῦ Πάσχα Ἀποδόσεως, ἀντὶ τούτου ψάλλεται τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρὶς καὶ τοῦτο εἰς ἦχον β΄ χῦμα.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΕΥΛΟΓΙΑ ΚΥΡΙΟΥ

49.    Πρὸ τῆς Ἀπολύσεως τῆς ἱερᾶς Λειτουργίας ἀπευθύνεται ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως πρὸς τὸν λαὸν ἡ εὐχὴ Εὐλογία Κυρίου καὶ ἔλεος ἔλθοι ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς, τῇ αὐτοῦ χάριτι καὶ φιλανθρωπίᾳ πάντοτε... ἐπίσης καὶ ἐν τοῖς Ἑσπερινοῖς, ἐν οἷς γίνεται Ἀρτοκλασία, ὡς ἐσημειώθη καὶ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ. Ἔστι δ’ αὕτη ἡ ἑκάστῳ χριστιανῷ ποθεινὴ εὐχή, ἡ ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡμῶν παρὰ τοῦ λειτουργοῦ Ἱερέως εὐλογία.

ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΔΙ' ΕΥΧΩΝ

50.    Τὸ ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως ἐν τῷ τέλει πάσης προσευχῆς καὶ ἱεροπραξίας καὶ δὴ καὶ τῆς Λειτουργίας ἐκφωνούμενον Δι’ εὐχῶν τῶν ἁγίων Πατέρων ἡμῶν ἐστὶ τὸ ἐπισφράγισμα. Ἐν τῇ Διακαινησίμῳ ὅμως ἑβδομάδι ἀντὶ τούτου καταλιμπανομένου, ὁ Ἱερεὺς μετὰ τὴν ἀπόλυσιν καὶ τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ καὶ τῆς Λειτουργίας ἐκφωνεῖ τρὶς τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, εἶτα ὁ Ἱερεὺς Δόξα τῇ αὐτοῦ τριημέρῳ ἐγέρσει, ὁ λαὸς Προσκυνοῦμεν αὐτοῦ τὴν τριήμερον ἔγερσιν, καὶ αὖθις τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ὁλόκληρον.
    Σημειωτέον δὲ ὅτι χοροστατοῦντος ἐν ταῖς ἱεραῖς Ἀκολουθίαις Ἀρχιερέως ἢ Πατριάρχου, λέγεται — ἀντὶ Δι’ εὐχῶν τῶν ἁγίων Πατέρων,— Δι’ εὐχῶν τοῦ ἁγίου Δεσπότου ἡμῶν, Κύριε Ἰησοῦ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, Ἀμήν.

*(Printed Page 110)*

=== LEAF p126 ===
[English Facing Translation: The Divine Liturgy — Concerning Blessed is the Name of the Lord (cont.), Concerning The Blessing of the Lord, Concerning Through the Prayers (p. 111)]

111

recitative style, and in all three Liturgies — the Presanctified, Chrysostom's and Basil's — after the Prayer behind the Pulpit. Only during Bright Week and the Leave-taking of Pascha [Easter], we chant instead "Christ is risen" three times also in Mode II in recitative style.

CONCERNING "THE BLESSING OF THE LORD"

49.    Before the Dismissal of the Divine Liturgy, the Priest turns to the people and blesses them with the prayer "The blessing of the Lord, through his grace and love towards mankind, be upon you always, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages." This blessing is made also at the end of Vespers in which an Artoklasia [Blessing of the Loaves] is celebrated, as was noted above in the section on Vespers. This is the prayer yearned for by each Christian—the blessing by the celebrating priest in the name of the Lord our God.

CONCERNING "THROUGH THE PRAYERS"

50.    The Exclamation "Through the prayers of our holy Fathers" chanted by the Priest at the end of every prayer and sacred service, and indeed of the Liturgy, is the final seal. During Bright Week, however, instead of this exclamation which is omitted, the Priest, after the Dismissal Prayer of both Vespers and the Liturgy, exclaims "Christ is Risen!" three times, to which the people respond each time with "Truly He has risen!" Then the Priest proclaims "Glory to His three day resurrection!" to which the people reply "We worship His three-day Resurrection!" and immediately the entire hymn "Christ is risen" is done.
    Note that, whenever a Hierarch or Patriarch presides at the Divine Services, instead of "Through the prayers of our Holy Fathers," the following is recited: "Through the prayers of our holy Master [Bishop], Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us. Amen."

*(Printed Page 111)*

=== LEAF p127 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Daily Service — Of Vespers, Matins and Liturgy (p. 112)]

112

ΤΥΠΙΚΗ ΔΙΑΤΑΞΙΣ
ΤΗΣ ΚΑΘ’ ΗΜΕΡΑΝ ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΙΑΣ

ΤΟΥ ΕΣΠΕΡΙΝΟΥ¹, ΤΟΥ ΟΡΘΡΟΥ ΚΑΙ
ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑΣ

Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια ἐκ τῆς Παρακλητικῆς τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου, β΄ ἐκ τῶν πρώτων τριῶν Στιχηρῶν, α΄ ἐκ τῶν δευτέρων τριῶν, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας ἐκ τοῦ Μηναίου. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον, (ἢ Σταυροθεοτοκίον, τῇ Τρίτῃ καὶ τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας) Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ μετὰ τὸ Εἴη τὸ κράτος τὰ Ἀπόστιχα ἐκ τῆς Παρακλητικῆς Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Προσόμοιον Θεοτοκίον (ἢ Σταυροθεοτοκίον), Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν, ἐκ τῶν ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Ὡρολογίου ὡς καὶ τῆς Παρακλητικῆς καθημερινῶν Θεοτοκίων τῶν Ὀκτὼ ἤχων, καὶ ἡ μεγάλη Ἀπόλυσις.

    α΄. Ἐὰν ὁ τυχὼν τῆς ἡμέρας Ἅγιος ἔχῃ ς΄ Στιχηρά, ἀλλὰ στερῆται Δοξαστικοῦ, καταλιμπάνονται τὰ γ΄ καὶ ἀντ’ αὐτῶν ψάλλονται τὰ τῆς Παρακλητικῆς, ἅτινα καὶ προηγοῦνται.
    β΄. Ἐὰν ὁ Ἅγιος ἔχῃ δύο Δοξαστικά, ψάλλονται μόνον τὰ Στιχηρὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου ἄνευ τῆς Παρακλητικῆς, διπλασιαζόμενα.
    γ΄. Ἐὰν ὦσι δύο Ἅγιοι ἔχοντες ἴδια Στιχηρὰ ἕκαστος, ψάλλονται μόνα τὰ τῶν Ἁγίων, ἄνευ τῶν τῆς Παρακλητικῆς.
    δ΄. Ἐὰν ὁ τυχὼν ἐν Σαββάτῳ Ἅγιος μὴ ἔχῃ Δοξαστικόν, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας τὸ α΄ θεοτοκίον τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου, ἐὰν δὲ ἔχῃ Δοξαστικόν, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ Ἀπολυτίκιον λέγεται ἐπίσης τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Θεοτοκίον

---

1. Οὐδὲν ἐνταῦθα περὶ τῆς Θ΄ λέγομεν, ἥτις προηγεῖται τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ, διότι περὶ αὐτῆς ἐν τῇ Προθεωρίᾳ ἀρκετὰ ἐσημειώθησαν § 1.

*(Printed Page 112)*

=== LEAF p128 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Daily Service — Of Vespers, Matins and Liturgy (p. 113)]

113

ORDER
OF THE DAILY SERVICE

OF VESPERS¹, MATINS AND LITURGY

In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm, at Lord, I have cried, we sing Stichira Prosomia from the Paraklitiki in the Mode of the week, 2 from the first 3 Stichira, 1 from the second 3 Stichira, and 3 of the Saint of the day from the Mineon. Glory, Now and Ever the Prosomion Theotokion (or Stavrotheotokion [Crucifixion Theotokion] on Tuesday and Thursday evening). "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day, and after "Blessed and glorified be the majesty," the Aposticha from the Paraklitiki. Glory, Now and Ever the Prosomion Theotokion (or Stavrotheotokion). "Lord, now let," the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint, Glory, Now and Ever, the appropriate Theotokion from the daily Theotokia of the Eight Modes either from the end of the Orologion or the Paraklitiki, and then the Great Dismissal.
    1. If the Saint of the day has 6 Stichira, but is lacking a Doxastikon, 3 of the Saint's Stichira are omitted and in their place 3 Stichira of the Paraklitiki are chanted before the 3 Stichira of the Saint.
    2. If the Saint has 2 Doxastika, only the Stichira of the Saint are sung — each one repeated twice — without those of the Paraklitiki.
    3. If there are two Saints, each having his own Stichira, only the Stichira of these two Saints are sung, without those of the Paraklitiki.
    4. If the Saint celebrated on a Saturday has no Doxastikon, on Friday evening we chant for Glory, Now and ever, the first Theotokion of the occurring Mode of the week. If the Saint has a Doxastikon, we chant Glory of the Saint and Now and ever the first Theotokion of the occuring

---

1. We mention nothing in this section about the 9th Hour, which precedes Vespers, since enough has been said about it in Paragraph One of the Pre-theory.

*(Printed Page 113)*

=== LEAF p129 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Daily Service — Of Vespers (cont.), Of Matins (p. 114)]

114

σύμφωνον τῷ ἤχῳ τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου, ἀλλ’ ἐὰν μὴ ἔχῃ ὁ Ἅγιος Δοξαστικά, Ἀπολυτίκιον ψάλλεται τὸ Ἀπόστολοι Μάρτυρες, Δόξα Μνήσθητι Κύριε ὡς ἀγαθὸς τῶν δούλων σου, Καὶ νῦν Μήτηρ ἁγία (Ὅρα ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ Ἀπολυτίκια τοῦ β΄ ἤχου, Παρασκ. ἑσπέρας). Ἐν τοῖς καθημερινοῖς Ἑσπερινοῖς Εἴσοδος οὐ γίνεται (ἐξαιρουμένων τῶν Ἑσπερινῶν τῶν Ἀποδόσεων τῶν Δεσποτικῶν καὶ Θεομητορικῶν ἑορτῶν)· ὅθεν μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς Θ΄ Ὥρας εὐθὺς ἀναγινώσκεται ὁ Προοιμιακὸς καὶ μετὰ τὸ Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον ἄνευ Συναπτῆς τὸ Καταξίωσον, ἀκολούθως ἡ Ἐκτενὴς Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑσπερινὴν κτλ. Ἐν τῇ περιπτώσει ταύτῃ ἡ Ὡραία Πύλη μένει κεκλεισμένη, ὁ δὲ Ἱερεὺς εἰσερχόμενος διὰ τῆς Νοτίου Πύλης, ἐξέρχεται τῆς Βορείου θυμιάσων εἰς τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω μετὰ μόνου τοῦ Ἐπιτραχηλίου.

2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον ὁ Ἱερεὺς Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι, Βασιλεῦ Οὐράνιε, τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄, Δόξα Πατρί, Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεί, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν τρὶς καὶ ὁ Ν΄ Ψαλμός, καὶ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν ὡς ἔστι διατεταγμένον ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ. Ἐν ταῖς Προεορτίοις καὶ Μεθεόρτοις ἡμέραις τῶν Δεσποτικῶν καὶ Θεομητορικῶν ἑορτῶν ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἰδοὺ ὁ Νυμφίος λέγεται τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον ἢ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς τὰς μεθεόρτους, καὶ ἀντὶ τῶν Τροπαρίων Μνήσθητι Κύριε ὡς ἀγαθὸς τῶν δούλων σου λέγονται τὰ Κοντάκια. Μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν εὐθὺς ψάλλονται τὰ Κατανυκτικὰ Τροπάρια Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς Κύριε, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, Δόξα, Κύριε ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, Καὶ νῦν, Τῆς εὐσπλαγχνίας τὴν πύλην (τούτου ψαλλομένου αἴρεται τὸ παραπέτασμα τῆς Ὡραίας Πύλης), ὁ δὲ Ἱερεὺς βαλὼν ἐπιτραχήλιον ἵσταται πρὸ τῶν πυλῶν τοῦ ἁγίου Βήματος καὶ βλέπων πρὸς ἀνατολὰς λέγει. Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου, δεόμεθά σου ἐπάκουσον καὶ ἐλέησον ὁ α΄ Χορὸς Κύριε ἐλέησον τρίς, Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων Χριστιανῶν, ὁ β΄ Χορὸς Κύριε ἐλέησον τρίς, Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν... Κύριε ἐλέησον τρίς, Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τοῦ διαφυλαχθῆναι τὴν ἁγίαν Ἐκκλησίαν ταύτην καὶ τὴν πόλιν (ἢ χώραν) ταύτην, καὶ πᾶσαν πόλιν καὶ χώραν, ἀπὸ ὀργῆς λιμοῦ, λοιμοῦ, σεισμοῦ, καταποντισμοῦ κτλ. τὴν καθ’ ἡμῶν κινουμένην καὶ ῥύσασθαι ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῆς ἐπικειμένης δικαίας αὐτοῦ ἀπειλῆς καὶ ἐλεῆσαι ἡμᾶς· οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον ἐκ περιτροπῆς τετράκις ἀνὰ δέκα, ὁ Ἱερεὺς ἔτι δεόμεθα καὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ εἰσακοῦσαι Κύριον τὸν Θεὸν φωνῆς τῆς δεήσεως ἡμῶν τῶν ἁμαρτωλῶν καὶ ἐλεῆσαι ἡμᾶς· οἱ Χοροί· τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον ἔτι τρίς· ὁ Ἱερεὺς

*(Printed Page 114)*

=== LEAF p130 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Daily Service — Of Vespers (cont.), Of Matins (p. 115)]

115

Mode of the week. The Apolytikion is also that of the Saint, and the Theotokion that follows is in the same Mode as the Saint's Apolytikion. But if the Saint has no Doxastika, the Apolytikion chanted is "Apostles Martyrs"; Glory, "Remember, O Lord, as a good One, your servants"; Now and ever, "Holy Mother." (See the Apolytikia for Friday evening, Mode II, in the Orologion). On weekday Vespers, the Entrance is not done (with the exception of the Vespers of the Leave-takings of Feasts of the Lord and the Theotokos); when, immediately after the Prayer of the Ninth Hour, the Introductory Psalm is read, and after "O Gladsome Light" we do the Prokimenon without a Litany and then "Vouchsafe, O Lord." Then follow the Petitions "Let us complete the evening prayer," etc. In this situation, the Royal Gate remains closed, and the Priest, entering through the South Door, exits through the North Door, censing at the "Let my prayer arise," wearing only the Epitrachilion.

2.    At Matins, the Priest: "Blessed is our God," "Glory to You, our God, Glory to You," "O Heavenly King," the Trisagion, "For Yours is the Kingdom," "Lord, have mercy" (12 times), Glory to the Father, Now and ever, "O come let us worship" (3 times), Psalm 50, and the Midnight Service as prescribed in the Orologion. On Pre-festal and Post-festal days of the Lord's and Theotokos's Feasts, instead of "Behold the Bridegroom," the Pre-festal Apolytikion is chanted or, on Post-feast days, the Apolytikion of the Feast is chanted and, instead of the hymns "Remember, O Lord, as a good One, your servants," the Kontakia are said. Immediately after the Midnight Service, the Penintential Hymns "Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy, Glory, Lord have mercy on us, Now and ever, O Blessed Theotokos, open the doors of compassion to us." (As this is chanted, the curtain of the Royal Gate is opened), the Priest, putting on the Epitrachilion, stands before the Gate of the Holy Sanctuary and looking toward the east, says, "Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy; we pray to You, hear and have mercy." The First Choir: "Lord, have mercy" (3 times). The Priest: "Again we pray for the pious and Orthodox Christians." The Second Choir: "Lord, have mercy" (3 times). The Priest: "Again we pray for our Archbishop..." The Choir: "Lord have mercy" (3 times). The Priest: "Again we pray that this holy church and this city and every city and country may be spared from famine and pestilence, earthquake and flood, etc... and save us from His just anger that hangs over us, and that He may have mercy on us." The Choirs sing "Lord, have mercy" (in rounds of four, each sung ten times). The Priest: "Again we pray that the Lord God may listen to the voice of the supplication of us sinners,

*(Printed Page 115)*
