=== LEAF p551 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. Mark the Apostle and Evangelist (April 25); Situation IV Concl. (§ 9 Concl.), Situation V (§§ 10–11) (p. 536)]

536

Κυριακῇ §5, 6 (πλὴν τοῦ ὅτι εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Καὶ νῦν λέγεται οὐχὶ τὸ Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, ἀλλὰ [τὸ Δοξαστικὸν τῆς προηγουμένης Κυριακῆς] )· τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος καταλιμπάνεται ἡ τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς Ἀκολουθία καὶ ἀντὶ αὐτῆς συμψάλλεται ἡ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου.

Ε΄.

10.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τὰ Προσόμοια τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς· τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

11.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον ἅπασα ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς διατάττεται ἐν τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ, οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς· τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου κτλ. ἡ θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου (εἰ βούλει), Καὶ νῦν τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἐπίσης καὶ Κοινωνικόν.
    Καὶ ἐν τῇ Ἀποδόσει τῆς ἑορτῆς ἡ αὐτὴ τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ Ἀποστόλου τηρεῖται τάξις. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς μεθεόρτοις ἡμέραις τῆς ἑορτῆς ταύτης, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἀποστόλου ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἀποστόλου δύναται νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Τρίτης τῆς Διακαινησίμου μέχρι τοῦ Σαββάτου τῆς ἑβδομάδος τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος. (Ὅρα ἐν τῷ Πίνακι τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου).

*(Printed Page 536)*

=== LEAF p552 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. Mark the Apostle and Evangelist (April 25); Situation IV Concl. (§ 9 Concl.), Situation V (§§ 10–11) (p. 537)]

537

Service see above Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Sunday of the Myrrhbearers (except that, at the Praises, the Now and ever hymn is not “It is the day of Resurrection,” {but is replaced by the Glory Hymn [Doxastikon] of the Praises of the preceeding Sunday, prefaced by Now and ever}); on the Sunday of the Samaritan Woman, the Service of Mid-Pentecost is omitted and in its place is sung that of the Apostle.

SITUATION FIVE

10.    If the Feast of Saint Mark occurs on the Wednesday of Mid-Pentecost, in Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Apostle, Glory, Now and ever of the Feast. The Aposticha of the Feast, Glory of the Apostle, Now and ever of the Feast. Apolytikia: of the Feast, of the Apostle, and again of the Feast and the Dismissal.
11.    On Wednesday at Matins, the entire Service of the Feast as prescribed in the Pentikostarion, the Canons of the Feast and of the Apostle. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Apostle, the Kathisma of the Feast, that of the Apostle and the other of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast; the Minologion of the Apostle, etc. Then the 9th Ode of the Feast. The Exapostilarion of the Feast, that of the Apostle and again that of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Apostle, Glory of the Apostle (if desired), Now and ever of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast. And immediately follows the Liturgy including the Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Feast as well as the Communion Hymn of the Feast.
    On the Leave-taking of the Feast, the same order of the Service of the Apostle is followed. In the Post-feast days of this Feast, the Service of the Apostle is sung according to the order of the Mineon with the hymns of the Post-feast.
    Note that the Feast of the Apostle may occur in the period of the Pentikostarion from the Tuesday of Bright Week until the Saturday of the week of the Samaritan Woman. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

*(Printed Page 537)*

=== LEAF p553 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Athanasios the Great (May 2); Situation I (§ 1), Situation II Opening (§§ 2–3) (p. 538)]

538

ΜΗΝ ΜΑΙΟΣ

Τῇ Β΄.    Τοῦ ἐν ἁγίοις Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Ἀθανασίου τοῦ Μεγάλου.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ

Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου ἐντὸς τῆς ἑβδομάδος τοῦ Θωμᾶ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Θωμᾶ.

Β΄.

2.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Ἀποδόσει τῆς αὐτῆς ἑορτῆς, τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Στιχηρὸν Τὰς ἑσπερινὰς ἡμῶν εὐχάς, εἶτα τὰ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

3.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ ψαλτήριον, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Κάθισμα αὐτοῦ τε καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Θωμᾶ· Καταβασία Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄ Μετὰ τὴν ἐκ τάφου σου, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον

*(Printed Page 538)*

=== LEAF p554 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Athanasios the Great (May 2); Situation I (§ 1), Situation II Opening (§§ 2–3) (p. 539)]

539

MONTH OF MAY

2nd.    Our Father among the Saints Athanasios the Great.

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Feast of Saint Athanasios occurs during the week of Thomas, his Service is chanted according to the order of service of the Mineon together with the hymns of the Post-feast of the Sunday of Thomas.

SITUATION TWO

2.    If the Feast of Saint Athanasios occurs on the Leave-taking of the Feast of Thomas, on Friday at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” the three Idiomela of the Feast, and three Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. At the Aposticha: the Stichiron “Accept our evening prayers,” then the three Aposticha of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saint and again that of the Feast and Dismissal.

3.    On Saturday, following the Midnight Service, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as at Vespers, the Psalter selection, the Kathismata of the day from the Pentikostarion. Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ,” Psalm 50, the Canon of the Feast (Thomas Sunday) and of the Saint. After the Third Ode, the Kontakion of the Saint then the Kathisma of the Saint and of the Feast; after the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and the Ikos of the Feast, and the Minologion of the Saint, the Katavasie of Pascha and the 9th Ode of Thomas; the Katavasia “The Angel cried out.” The Exapostilaria: of the Feast, of the Saint, and the other one of the Feast. At the Praises: the three hymns of the Feast “After Your awesome Resurrection from the tomb,” and three hymns of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast and in due order

*(Printed Page 539)*

=== LEAF p555 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Athanasios the Great (May 2); Situation II Concl. (§ 3), Situation III (§ 4), Situation IV (§§ 5–6) (p. 540)]

540

τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλομεν τὰ ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Σὲ τὴν φαεινὴν λαμπάδα, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Γ΄.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Μυροφόρων, ὅρα τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου Μάρκου § 5-6.

Δ΄.

5.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Παραλύτου, τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, ἢ τοῦ Τυφλοῦ, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου γ΄, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα ἐκ τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Στιχηρὸν τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

6.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, κτλ. ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα (καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἰ βούλει) μετὰ τῶν β΄ Θεοτοκίων. ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου, ὡς καὶ τὸ τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα κτλ. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος καταλιμπάνεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, καὶ ἀντ᾽ αὐτῆς συμψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου.

*(Printed Page 540)*

=== LEAF p556 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Athanasios the Great (May 2); Situation II Concl. (§ 3), Situation III (§ 4), Situation IV (§§ 5–6) (p. 541)]

541

the Liturgy, in which we sing the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion of the Feast. Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “You, the shining lamp,” Communion Hymn of the Feast, the Apolytikion “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name of the Lord,” and Dismissal.

SITUATION THREE

4.    If the Feast of Saint Athanasios occurs on the Sunday of the Myrrhbearers, see the Feast of Saint Mark, Paragraphs 5-6 for the order of the service.

SITUATION FOUR

5.    If the Feast of Saint Athanasios occurs on the Sunday of the Paralytic, the Samaritan Woman or the Blind Man, in Vespers at “Lord, I have cried” we chant 4 of the Resurrection, 3 of the Pentikostarion and 3 of the Saint, Glory of the Pentikostarion, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichiron of the Mode, and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Pentikostarion. The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saints, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
6.    On Sunday at Matins, the Apolytikia as in Vespers, etc., the Canon of Pascha (and that of the Saint, if desired) with the 2 Theotokia. After the Third Ode, the Kontakion and the Kathisma of the Saint as well as that of the Pentikostarion. Exapostilaria: of Pascha, of the Saint, and of the Sunday. At the Praises: 3 hymns of the Resurrection, 3 of the Saint, and “A sacred Pascha.” Glory of the Pentikostarion, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection” etc. In the Liturgy, after the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion “Though You did descend into the grave.” Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried out,” Communion Hymn “Body of Christ,” the Apolytikion “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name of the Lord,” and Dismissal.
    On the Sunday of the Samaritan Woman the Service of Mid-pentecost is omitted, and in its place the Service of the Saint is co-sung.

*(Printed Page 541)*

=== LEAF p557 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Athanasios the Great (May 2); Situation V (§ 7), Situation VI (§§ 8–9), Situation VII Opening (§ 10) (p. 542)]

542

Ε΄.

7.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς ἢ τῇ Ἀποδόσει, ὅρα τὴν διάταξιν ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου Μάρκου § 10, 11.

ΣΤ΄.

8.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Πάσχα, τῇ Τρίτῃ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια δ΄, Δόξα, Τὸν τῷ Πατρὶ συνάναρχον, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν παγκόσμιον δόξαν. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Στιχηρὸν Τῷ πάθει σου Χριστὲ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

9.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ ἡ Καταβασία, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ ἡ Αἴτησις ὡς εἴθισται· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι τὸν Ὄρθρον καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου χῦμα· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Πάσχα, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ τρίς· μετὰ τὴν ζ΄ καὶ η΄ Ὠδὴν, ἡ Θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων, Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Πάσχα, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ αὖθις τὸ τοῦ Πάσχα. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, Κοινωνικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ζ΄.

10.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς Ἀναλήψεως, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου μετατίθεται καὶ ψάλλεται τῇ Παρασκευῇ ὡς ἔστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς Ἀναλήψεως.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀθανασίου δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐντὸς τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου ἀπὸ τῆς Δευτέρας τοῦ Θωμᾶ

*(Printed Page 542)*

=== LEAF p558 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Athanasios the Great (May 2); Situation V (§ 7), Situation VI (§§ 8–9), Situation VII Opening (§ 10) (p. 543)]

543

SITUATION FIVE

7.    If the Feast of Saint Athanasios occurs on the Wednesday of Mid-pentecost or its Leave-taking, see the Feast of Saint Mark, Paragraphs 10-11 for the order of the Service.

SITUATION SIX

8.    If the Feast of Saint Athanasios occurs on Wednesday of the Leave-taking of Pascha, on Tuesday evening, at “Lord, I have cried” we chant six Stichira of the Resurrection and 4 Prosomia of the Saint, Glory, “Him Who is coeternal with the Father,” Now and ever, “The universal glory.” At the Aposticha: the Stichiron “By Your Passion, O Christ” and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection.” The Apolytikion “Christ is risen,” the Apolytikion of the Saint, again “Christ is risen,” and Dismissal.
9.    On Wednesday at Matins, the Canon of Pascha and of the Saint, at each Ode the Katavasia, the “Christ is risen” and the Petition as customary. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “When they who were with Mary” and the Kontakion of the Saint (read); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of Pascha, the Minologion of the Saint and “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ,” three times; after the 7th and 8th Odes, the 9th Ode of Pascha with its Megalynaria. The Exapostilaria: of Pascha, of the Saint and again of Pascha. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Saint and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” and in due order the Liturgy. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion “Christ is risen,” the Ypakoi, “When they who were with Mary,” the Apolytikion of the Saint, the Kontakion of Pascha, Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint, Communion Hymn of Pascha, “Christ is risen” and Dismissal.

SITUATION SEVEN

10.    If the Feast of Saint Athanasios occurs on the Thursday of the Ascension, the Service of the Saint is transferred and sung on that Friday, as prescribed in the Mineon with the Post-feast hymns of the Ascension.
    Note that the Feast of Saint Athanasios can occur during the period of the Pentikostarion from the Monday of Thomas until the Saturday

*(Printed Page 543)*

=== LEAF p559 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of May: St. Athanasios Concl. Note; St. John the Apostle and Evangelist the Theologian (May 8); Situation I (§§ 1–2) (p. 544)]

544

μέχρι τοῦ μετὰ τὴν Ἀνάληψιν (Ὅρα τὸν Πίνακα τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου).

Τῇ Η΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀποστόλου καὶ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Ἰωάννου τοῦ Θεολόγου.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ

Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Μυροφόρων, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῶν Μυροφόρων β΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Μυροφόρων. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα· εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ ἀναστάσιμον τοῦ ἤχου Στιχηρὸν καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν, Σὲ τὸν ἀναβαλλόμενον τὸ φῶς, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια Ὅτε κατῆλθες, Ὁ εὐσχήμων Ἰωσήφ, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Ταῖς Μυροφόροις γυναιξὶ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἠτήσατο Ἰωσήφ, τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστι, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὁ εὐσχήμων Ἰωσήφ, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα κατὰ σειράν, εἰς τὴν β΄ Αἱ Μυροφόροι ὄρθριαι, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Ἀναπεσὼν ἐν τῷ στήθει, Καὶ νῦν, Τὰ μύρα τῆς ταφῆς, εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Τὴν μνήμην τιμήσωμεν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερδεδοξασμένη, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν δύο Θεοτοκίων, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Μυροφόρων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς· αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα, εἶτα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ δύο Θεοτοκία, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ γ΄, καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Εὐαγγελιστὰ

*(Printed Page 544)*

=== LEAF p560 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of May: St. Athanasios Concl. Note; St. John the Apostle and Evangelist the Theologian (May 8); Situation I (§§ 1–2) (p. 545)]

545

following the Ascension (See the Chart of Celebrations).

8th.    The Holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Theologian.

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Feast of Saint John the Evangelist occurs on the Sunday of the Myrrhbearers, on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Myrrhbearers and 4 of the Evangelist. Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever of the Myrrhbearers. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichiron of the Mode and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “You Who puts on light as a garment.” The Apolytikia: “When You descended,” “The noble Joseph,” the Evangelist’s, “Unto the myrrhbearing Women,” and Dismissal.
2.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti and the Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “Joseph asked,” “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “The noble Joseph,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata of the First Stasis are those of the Resurrection in order; at the Second Stasis “The myrrhbearers having risen,” Glory of the Evangelist “Having reclined upon the bosom,” Now and ever, “Bring myrrh for Your burial”; at the Third Stasis, the Evangelist’s Kathismata “Let us honor the memory” {Glory, repeat the same} Now and ever, “Most glorified.” The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon. The Canon of Pascha with the two Theotokia, and the Canon of the Evangelist. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Evangelist, then the Kathisma of the Evangelist and the Myrrhbearers; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Myrrhbearers, the Minologion, and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie of Pascha, and the entire order of the Matins Gospel, the 9th Ode of Pascha, then the Saint’s and the 2 Theotokia. The Exapostilaria: of Pascha, of the Evangelist, and of the Myrrhbearers. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Stichira of the Evangelist, and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha,” Glory, “O Evangelist John,” Now and ever, “It is the day

*(Printed Page 545)*
