=== LEAF p531 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation VI Concl. (§§ 17–18), Situation VII Opening (§§ 19–20) (p. 516)]

516

ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ὅτε κατῆλθες, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν τῶν Μυροφόρων Τὸν λίθον τοῦ μνήματος, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἀνέτειλεν ἰδού, Καὶ νῦν, Πάντα ὑπὲρ ἔννοιαν· εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν Αἱ Μυροφόροι ὄρθριαι, Δόξα, Πόθῳ ζέοντι, Καὶ νῦν, Τὰ μύρα τῆς ταφῆς· εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν Γεωργήσας ἐμμελῶς, {Δόξα,} Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερδεδοξασμένη, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ τοῦ Πάσχα, ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὰ δύο Θεοτοκία· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Μυροφόρων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς, αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα ὡς καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὰ β΄ Θεοτοκία ὡς σύνηθες, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄, καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Ἀνέτειλε τὸ ἔαρ, Καὶ νῦν Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

18.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὰ γ΄ Ἀπολυτίκια, τῶν Μυροφόρων, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ· Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ζ΄.

19.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐντὸς τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης μέχρι τῆς Παρασκευῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν, μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῶν Μυροφόρων, ἤτοι ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου ς΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Μυροφόρων. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Μυροφόρων. Ἀπολυτίκια Ὅτε κατῆλθες, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Ταῖς μυροφόροις γυναιξί, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

20.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,

*(Printed Page 516)*

=== LEAF p532 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation VI Concl. (§§ 17–18), Situation VII Opening (§§ 19–20) (p. 517)]

517

the Apolytikion “When You did descend unto death,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos. Kathismata of the First Stasis [Stichologia] “The stone of the grave,” Glory of the Saint “Behold, the springtime of grace has dawned,” Now and ever, “Beyond comprehension.” At the Second Stasis “The Myrrhbearers, having risen early,” Glory, “Ablaze with the desire,” Now and ever, “Bringing myrrh for Your burial.” At the Third Stasis “Studiously cultivating,” {Glory,} Now and ever, “Most glorified are you.” The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon. The Canons of Pascha, of the Saint and the two Theotokia. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, then the Kathisma of the Saint and that of the Myrrhbearers; after the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Myrrhbearers, the Minologion, and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie of Pascha, and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then the 9th Ode of Pascha and as well that of the Saint, then the two Theotokia, as usual. Exapostilaria: of Pascha, of the Saint and of the Myrrhbearers. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Resurrection and 3 of the Saint, Glory, “Spring has dawned.” Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

18.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha; after the Entrance, the three Apolytikia of the Myrrhbearers, the Apolytikion of the Saint, the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church; the Kontakion “Though You went down into the tomb.” The Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried,” Communion Hymn “Body of Christ,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name,” and Dismissal.

SITUATION SEVEN

19.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs during this week until Friday, the Service is chanted as prescribed in the Mineon, with the Post-feast hymns of the Myrrhbearers; that is, at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the six Stichira of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Myrrhbearers. At the Aposticha: the Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Myrrhbearers. Apolytikia: “When You did descend unto death,” of the Saint, and “Unto the myrrhbearing women,” and the Dismissal.

20.    In Matins, the Liti of the Saint, Glory, Now and ever, “Joseph

*(Printed Page 517)*

=== LEAF p533 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation VII Concl. (§ 20), Situation VIII Opening (§§ 21–22) (p. 518)]

518

Ἠτήσατο Ἰωσὴφ κτλ. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον, ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῶν Μυροφόρων ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων κτλ. ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα³ καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν⁴, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Μυροφόρων, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν, {μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον,} τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Η΄.

21.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλονται τῶν Μυροφόρων Ἰδιόμελα β΄ καὶ τὰ ς΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Αἱ μυροφόροι γυναῖκες. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα, Τὸν νοερὸν ἀδάμαντα, Καὶ νῦν, Σὲ τὸν ἀναβαλλόμενον τὸ φῶς, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια Ὅτε κατῆλθες, Ὁ εὐσχήμων Ἰωσήφ, Δόξα, Ὡς τῶν αἰχμαλώτων ἐλευθερωτής, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς μυροφόροις γυναιξὶ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

22.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἠτήσατο Ἰωσὴφ τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ὅτε κατῆλθες, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῶν Μυροφόρων ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων κτλ. ὡς ἐν περιπτώσει Δ § 11· αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν

3. Ἡ ἀκριβὴς τάξις ἀπῄτει κανόνα τῆς προλαβούσης Κυριακῆς· ἀλλ᾿ ἡ φαιδρότης τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ ἁγίου Γεωργίου καθιέρωσεν ἤδη ἀπὸ χρόνων τὸν τοῦ Πάσχα.
4. Μετὰ τὴν Διακαινήσιμον ἑβδομάδα εἰς οἱανδήποτε ἡμέραν ἤθελε τύχει ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου (ἐκτὸς δηλονότι τῶν Κυριακῶν) μετὰ τὰ Δοξαστικά, Καὶ νῦν ψάλλονται τῆς προλαβούσης Κυριακῆς ἢ ἑορτῆς, καὶ οὐχὶ τοῦ Πάσχα, ὡς καὶ τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια, τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια (καὶ τὰ Κοντάκια, μόνον διὰ τὴν ἑβδομάδα τοῦ Θωμᾶ καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων)· στιχολογοῦμεν δὲ καὶ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, καὶ εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν· τὰ αὐτὰ καὶ εἰς τὰς τῶν λοιπῶν Ἁγίων μνήμας μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως (Ὅρα καὶ ἐν τῇ Προθεωρίᾳ).

*(Printed Page 518)*

=== LEAF p534 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation VII Concl. (§ 20), Situation VIII Opening (§§ 21–22) (p. 519)]

519

asked for the Body” etc. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter, the Polyeleos. The Kathismata of the Saint and one Kathisma of the Myrrhbearers in place of each of the Theotokia, etc.; the Canon of Pascha³ and that of the Saint. The Katavasie of Pascha, then “More honorable.”⁴ The Exapostilaria: of the Saint and of the Myrrhbearers. At the Praises: the Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Myrrhbearers, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saint; and immediately follows the Liturgy, in which are sung the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha; {after the Entrance,} the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Kontakion “Though You went down into the tomb,” the Apostolos and the Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.

SITUATION EIGHT

21.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Saturday of this week, on Friday evening, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the two Idiomela of the Myrrhbearers and six Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “The myrrhbearing women.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Saint. The Aposticha of the Saint, Glory, “The intellectual diamond,” Now and ever, “You Who puts on light as a garment.” Apolytikia: “When You did descend unto death,” “The noble Joseph,” Glory, “As the liberator of captives,” Now and ever, “Unto the myrrhbearing women”; and the Dismissal.

22.    On Saturday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint, Glory, Now and ever, “Joseph asked for the Body”; the Trisagion “When You did descend unto death,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata of the Saint and one Kathisma of the Myrrhbearers in place of each of the Theotokia, etc., as in Situation Four, Paragraph 11. The Katavasie of Pascha, then we chant “More honorable.” The Exapostilarion of the Saint,

3. The exact order called for the Canon of the preceding Sunday, but the great joyfulness of the Feast of Saint George established from a long time ago the Canon of Pascha.
4 After Bright Week, on whatever day the Feast occurs (except for Sunday), after the Glory, the Now and ever chanted are of the preceding Sunday or feast, and not that of Pascha, as well as the Apolytikia, the Exapostilaria (and the Kontakia, only for the week of Thomas and the Myrrhbearers). We also chant “More honorable.” In Matins, and at “Especially,” we chant “It is meet.” The same is chanted on the feasts of other Saints until the Leave-taking. (See also the Protheoria).

*(Printed Page 519)*

=== LEAF p535 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation VIII Concl. (§ 22), Situation IX Opening (§§ 23–24) (p. 520)]

520

τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ β΄, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ πᾶσα κτίσις καὶ τὸ Εἰπάτωσαν Ἰουδαῖοι, καὶ δ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Μετὰ φόβου ἦλθον γυναῖκες (ζήτει τῇ Τρίτῃ εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα). Δοξολογία Μ. τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια τῶν Μυροφόρων, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Τὸ χαῖρε ταῖς Μυροφόροις. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν. Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, Ἀπόλυσις, καὶ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Μυροφόρων⁵.

Θ΄.

23.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Παραλύτου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ Παραλύτου β΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνέβη ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Ὁ τῷ πάθει σου Χριστὲ καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἐν τῇ στοᾷ τοῦ Σολομῶντος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

24.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς Κανὼν καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν Ἐπὶ τῇ Προβατικῇ Κολυμβήθρᾳ, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν Χριστὸς ἐκ νεκρῶν ἐγήγερται, Δόξα, Ἀνέτειλεν ἰδού, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν ὡραιότητα· εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν Πάντα ἀνθρώπινα, Δόξα, Πόθῳ ζέοντι, Καὶ νῦν,

5. Κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν τύπον ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου, ὅταν τύχῃ καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Δ΄ καὶ τῆς Ε΄ ἑβδομάδος, πλὴν τοῦ ὅτι τὰ πρῶτα ἑσπέρια στιχηρὰ καὶ τὸ τῶν Αἴνων ψάλλονται μόνα τοῦ Ἁγίου.

*(Printed Page 520)*

=== LEAF p536 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation VIII Concl. (§ 22), Situation IX Opening (§§ 23–24) (p. 521)]

521

and that of the Myrrhbearers. At the Praises: 2 Resurrection Stichira “Every breath and all creation glorify You” and “Let the Jews make answer” and four Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “The women came with fear,” (see Tuesday at the Aposticha), Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saint. And immediately follows the Liturgy, in which are sung the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia of the Myrrhbearers, of the Saint, of the Saint of the Church, the Kontakion “The Hail to the Myrrhbearers”; the Apostolos and the Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name,” Dismissal and Leave-taking of the Myrrhbearers.⁵

SITUATION NINE

23.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Sunday of The Paralytic, on Saturday evening, after the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the four Stichira of the Resurrection, two of the Paralytic and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “Jesus went up to Jerusalem.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichiron “O Christ, Who by Your Passion,” then the Stichira of Pascha “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “In Solomon's Porch.” Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion, and the Dismissal.

24.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Saint; Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “At the Sheep's Pool” and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. Kathismata of the First Stasis [Stichologia], “Christ from the dead has arisen,” Glory, “Behold, the springtime of grace has dawned,” Now and ever, “Awed by the beauty of your virginity.” At the Second Stasis, “All human things,” Glory, “Ablaze with the desire,” Now

5. The Service of the Saint is sung in this manner when it occurs on the Saturday of the 4th and the 5th Week. However, the first vesperal Stichira and the ones of the Praises are those of the Saint only.

*(Printed Page 521)*

=== LEAF p537 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation IX Concl. (§§ 24–25), Situation X (§ 26), Situation XI Opening (§§ 27–28) (p. 522)]

522

Τὸ ἀκατάληπτον, εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν Γεωργήσας ἐμμελῶς, {Δόξα,} Καὶ νῦν, Τὰ ἐπουράνια, εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον κτλ. ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Μυροφόρων (περιπτώσει ς΄ § 17). Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Κύριε τὸν Παράλυτον, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

25.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ι΄.

26.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Δευτέρᾳ καὶ τῇ Τρίτῃ τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Παραλύτου (ὡς ἐν περιπτώσει Ζ΄ § 19-20). Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ Εὐφραινέσθω τὰ οὐράνια.

ΙΑ΄.

27.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Τετάρτῃ τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, τῇ Τρίτῃ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια δ΄ καὶ δ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα β΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἓν τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

28.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὅτε τὸ μέσον τῆς ἑορτῆς (ζήτει εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα), εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὰ

*(Printed Page 522)*

=== LEAF p538 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation IX Concl. (§§ 24–25), Situation X (§ 26), Situation XI Opening (§§ 27–28) (p. 523)]

523

and ever, “The inconceivable.” At the Third Stasis, “Studiously cultivating,” {Glory,} Now and ever, “The heavens all rejoiced.” Then the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon, etc., as prescribed in the Sunday of the Myrrhbearers (Situation 6, Paragraph 17). At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Resurrection and 3 of the Saint, and the Stichira of Pascha “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “O Lord, the Paralytic,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

25.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Saint, the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church; the Kontakion “Though You went down into the tomb.” The Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried,” Communion Hymn “Body of Christ,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name,” and Dismissal.

SITUATION TEN

26.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on Monday or Tuesday of this week, the Service of the Saint is chanted according to the order of the Mineon together with the Post-feast hymns of the Paralytic (as in Situation Seven, Paragraphs 19 - 20). Apolytikion of the Saint, Glory, Now and ever, “Let the Heavens rejoice.”

SITUATION ELEVEN

27.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Wednesday of Mid-Pentecost, on Tuesday evening, after the Introductory Psalm and the First Stasis of the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the four Prosomia of the Feast and four of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast, Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day, the Readings two of the Feast and one of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the Idiomela of the Feast, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. Apolytikia: of the Feast, of the Saint, and again of the Feast, and the Dismissal.

28.    On Wednesday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint; Glory, Now and ever of the Feast “When Mid-feast was come” (see the Aposticha) then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos of the Saint. Kathismata of the First Stasis [Stichologia]

*(Printed Page 523)*

=== LEAF p539 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation XI Concl. (§§ 28–29), Situation XII Opening (§§ 30–31) (p. 524)]

524

Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἀνέτειλεν ἰδού, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὁ πάντων ἐπιστάμενος· εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν Πόθῳ ζέοντι καὶ {Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,} Ὁ Δεσπότης τῶν ὅλων, εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν Γεωργήσας ἐμμελῶς, καὶ {Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,} τὸ ἐν τῇ γ΄ Ὠδῇ τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἑστηκὼς ἐν τῷ μέσῳ, εἶτα οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Δίκαιος ὡς φοῖνιξ ἀνθήσει, Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ, καὶ ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ Ἀθλοφόρου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τοῦ Ἁγίου, οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Θάλασσαν ἔπηξας, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς Φωτισθέντες ἀδελφοί, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.

29.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Μεσούσης τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου· Κοντάκιον Τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς νομικῆς, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἀλλότριον τῶν μητέρων ἡ παρθενία, Κοινωνικὸν Ὁ τρώγων μου τὴν σάρκα, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΙΒ΄.

30.    Εἰ τύχοι μεταξὺ τῶν μεθεόρτων τῆς ἑορτῆς ταύτης (δηλ. τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς), πλὴν τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ ς΄ Στιχηρὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα καὶ τὸ Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

31.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὅτε τὸ μέσον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος κτλ. ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει ΙΑ΄ § 28. Κανόνες, ὁ εἷς τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου,

*(Printed Page 524)*

=== LEAF p540 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation XI Concl. (§§ 28–29), Situation XII Opening (§§ 30–31) (p. 525)]

525

those of the Saint “Behold, the springtime of grace has dawned,” Glory, Now and ever that of the Feast “He who knows what lies in the hearts of all.” At the Second Stasis “Ablaze with the desire,” and {Glory, Now and ever,} “The Master of all.” At the Third Stasis “Studiously cultivating,” {Glory, Now and ever} the Kathisma of the Third Ode of the Canon of the Feast “Standing in the midst”; the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “The righteous shall flourish.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Matins Gospel of the Saint. Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ,” Psalm 50 read, Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Champion,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy on me” and the Idiomelon of the Saint; the Canons of the Feast and of the Saint. The Katavasie “Drowning the prideful Pharaoh,” then the 9th Ode of the Feast and that of the Saint are sung. The Exapostilarion of the Feast, that of the Saint and again that of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Saint, and the Stichira of Pascha “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast “Brethren, enlightened,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.

29.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion “Mid-way in the Feast,” and the Apolytikion of the Saint; the Kontakion “Of the Feast of the law”; the Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Feast. At “Especially,” “Virginity is alien to motherhood,” Communion Hymn “He that eats My Flesh,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.

SITUATION TWELVE

30.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs during the Post-feast of this Feast {i.e. of Mid-Pentecost}, except for the Sunday of the Samaritan Woman, at Vespers after the First Stasis of the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the six Stichira of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast, the Readings of the Saint. The Aposticha and the Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Post-feast. Apolytikia: of the Saint, of the Feast, and Dismissal.

31.    At Matins, the Liti of the Saint and Glory, Now and ever, “When Mid-feast was come,” the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Exapsalmos, etc., as prescribed in Situation Eleven, Paragraph 28. The Canons of the Feast and of the Saint, Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint. The Katavasie

*(Printed Page 525)*
