=== LEAF p1131 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Soft Chromatic Scale – Soleas – Spear – Spoon – Staff – Staff-Bearing Usher) (p. 1116 / TD-137)]

TD-137

*SOFT CHROMATIC SCALE (μαλακὴ χρωματικὴ κλίμαξ): Same as Mild Chromatic Scale.

*SOLEAS (σωλέας, ὁ) Slav.: Today, the term designates the entire area immediately before the IKONOSTASION. The soleas is usually raised above the level of the floor of the NAVE. In many churches the front edge of the soleas may be marked by the presence of a short railing or collonade which in ancient times was known as the TEMPLON.

    The SANCTUARY is usually one to three steps higher than the floor of the NAVE. The ICONOSTASION is not located directly on the edge of the Sanctuary, but is usually set a few feet back from the edge of the top step. This forms a walkway in front of the iconostasis for the clergy, called a SOLEAS. In the very center of the soleas immediately before the BEAUTIFUL GATE and on the same level as the Sanctuary, is a small extension (or thrust), often rounded, called the AMBON, on which the Priest or Deacon may stand to read the gospel during the services. In some churches, the soleas has been greatly expanded to form an area where various processions and other services may take place.

SPEAR (Λόγχη, ἡ): See LONCHI.

SPOON (Λαβίς, ἡ): The long-handled spoon which the priest uses to administer Holy Communion to the communicants near the end of the Divine Liturgy.

STAFF (Ποιμαντορικὴ Ῥάβδος, ἡ): The Pastoral Staff (Western Crozier) of a Greek Orthodox Hierarch is fashioned at the top to resemble the heads of two serpents, recalling Christ’s words: “Be you wise as serpents.” (Matt. 10:16). As a serpent each year forces its way through thorny plants to shed its old skin, so also must the Bishop lead others and follow along the thorny path which leads to the renewal of our souls. The use of the staff indicates that the Bishop is the shepherd of Christ’s flock.

STAFF-BEARING USHER (κλητὴρ ῥαβδοῦχος, ὁ): An acolyte whose duty is to carry the Pastoral Staff of a Hierarch and to deliver it to him when requested.

*(Printed Page TD-137)*

=== LEAF p1132 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Stanza – Star – Stasidia – Stasis – Stavrosimon – Stavrotheotokion – Stichari – Sticharion Part 1) (p. 1117 / TD-138)]

TD-138

STANZA (στροφή, ἡ) Greek “strofi.” Lit. a turn, bend or twist.
    In Byzantine hymnology, as in most poetry, a stanza (strofi) is a section of a large poetic work, dealing with the same theme or topic, copying the versification of the larger work, and fitting into its overall structure or form. See, for example, the stanzas (or troparia) in the Byzantine poetic forms of the KONTAKION or the CANON. See also STROFI (STROPHE).

STAR (ἀστερίσκος, ὁ): See ASTERISK.

STASIDIA (στασίδια, τά): The choir stalls or seats used in Orthodox monasteries and churches. They are characterized by having high backs and elevated arm rests to help support the weight of the user/chanter when standing. They also may have a hinged seat which has a small shelf-like projection on the under surface called a misericord also provided to help support the weight of the user. See also KATHISMATA.

STASIS (Στάσις, ἡ) Slav. Statja: A section of text.

STAVROSIMON, STAVROSIMA (Σταυρώσιμον, τό, pl. Σταυρώσιμα, τά): A hymn or group of hymns venerating the Lord's Cross.

STAVROTHEOTOKION (Σταυροθεοτοκίον, τό): A hymn to the Theotokos that refers to her standing by the Cross of Christ. These are typically found in the PARAKLITIKI in the hymnography for Wednesdays and Fridays.

STICHARI: (στιχάρι, τό). See VERSE.

STICHARION (Στιχάριον, τό): The Sticharion (Latin Alb) is the universal garment, usually white, worn by all classes of ordained clergy. In a slightly altered form it is also worn by deacons, subdeacons, altar servers, and someimes by readers. For the clergy it is a light weight long-sleeved ankle-length tunic. It is actually a form of the garment originally worn at an individuals baptism. Note that the word Alb is a shortened form of the Latin words Tunica Alba, a white undyed tunic. In the first century, the

*(Printed Page TD-138)*

=== LEAF p1133 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Sticharion Continued Part 2 – History of the Greco-Roman Tunic and Himation) (p. 1118 / TD-139)]

TD-139

tunic was the first article of clothing that one would wear in the morning. Working-class people wore knee-length tunics, while older people and people with less active occupations wore ankle-length tunics. The tunic was originally sleeveless, as Greeks and Romans thought sleeves were barbaric as barbarians, who generally lived in colder climates, wore them. Tunics did not acquire sleeves until the third century when a Roman Emperor is described as coming back from a military campaign wearing a tunic with sleeves.

    It was possible to wear more than one tunic at a time for warmth, and the tunic was usually used with a rope belt or cincture.

    In the first century, most people wore another garment called the himation over their tunics. The himation was a rectangular garment that was wrapped around the body. The designs on the himation, as well as its color and quality, varied depending on the wearer’s sex, occupation, and social status. Because of the relatively precarious way it was worn and the way it hindered movement, people had to remove it when they were engaged in certain physical activities. For example, when blind Bartimaeus ran to Jesus in Mark 10:46-52, he threw off his himation. Matthew 9:20-22 tells about a woman who was healed when she touched the hem of His himation. In Revelation 3:5, 3:18, and 4:4 people are given white himatia. Perhaps the writer of Revelation wanted us to think of people who had received a white tunic at their baptism now receiving an elegant and triumphant white himation to wear over it. (Note that most Bible translations are not consistent with the names of articles of clothing.) The himation never became a church vestment, probably because as servants, the clergy would have to remove it anyway. Scripture tells us that Jesus wore a himation over a tunic to the crucifixion. The soldiers tore the himation into four pieces, but because the tunic was woven in one piece, they cast lots for it. Jesus’ tunic would have been sleeveless and ankle-length. Ancient writings from that period refer to seamless tunics, but the technology for weaving them that way was lost in the fall of the Roman Empire, so the way in which this was done is not known. In the first four centuries of the Church, people were baptized in the nude. For propriety, they were baptized in three groups: men, women, and children; and female deacons baptized the women.

*(Printed Page TD-139)*

=== LEAF p1134 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Sticharion Continued Part 3 – Baptismal Symbolism and Hierarchical/Diaconal Usage) (p. 1119 / TD-140)]

TD-140

When they emerged from the water, they were immediately clothed in a white tunic (In Latin, a tunica alba, or alb). For this reason, the sticharion or alb is a reminder of baptism and a symbol of the resurrection on the Last Day.

    The Sticharion worn by the Reader/Chanter is his basic ecclesiastical garment. There is a also a much shorter garment called the Reader’s Felonion which barely covers the shoulders and is only used when he is first tonsured by the Bishop as a Reader. It symbolizes his dedication to the service of God. The Sticharion for Readers, Sub-Deacons and Deacons has wide sleeves while for Priests and Bishops it has narrower sleeves. It is called the robe of salvation and the garment of joy, symbolizing a pure and peaceful conscience, a spotless life, and the spiritual joy in the Lord which flows in him who wears it. (Modified from http://www.stots.edu/article.php?id=25, the web page of St. Tikhon Monastery in South Canaan Pennsylvania.)

    According to AE the Sticharion is a tunic-like vestment, resembling the Western dalmatic when worn by servers, readers, sub-deacons and deacons. When it is worn by bishops and priests it more closely resembles the alb; although it is not necessarily white.

    This word Sticharion should not be confused with the word “Stichiron” which is a particular type of hymn.

    Worn as the undermost vestment by bishops and priests, it is usually made from a simple white undyed or gold fabric.

    Worn as an outer vestment by deacons and subdeacons, it is usually more decorated and may reflect the colour of the day. It is open down the sides but held shut with baubles or buttons.

    Some jurisdictions still call the sticharion which the deacon wears a dalmatikon as it was called at the time of its introduction in the fourth century.

    When worn as the outer garment by deacons, subdeacons, altar servers, and sometimes by readers, the sticharion is a long robe with wide, loose sleeves. It is fastened at the neck, and is often open down the sides but held shut with buttons or ties. In appearance it is similar to the dalmatic and tunicle of the Western Church. It usually has a cross embroidered on or applied to the centre of the back, between the shoulder blades.

*(Printed Page TD-140)*

=== LEAF p1135 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Sticharion Concluded Part 4 – Vesting Prayer – Stichiron / Stichira Part 1) (p. 1120 / TD-141)]

TD-141

    During the Order of PROTHESIS or Preparation, the Priest takes his Sticharion, blesses the cross on the back and says, “Blessed is our God, now and ever and from all ages to all ages. Amen. My soul rejoices in the Lord; for He has clothed me with the garment of salvation and He has covered me with the robe of righteousness, He adorns me with a crown as a bridegroom, and adorns me with jewels as a bride. (Isaiah 61:10); now and always and from all ages to all ages. Amen.” («᾿Αγγαλιάσεται ἡ ψυχή μου ἐπὶ τῷ Κυρίῳ· ἐνέδυσε γάρ με ἱμάτιον σωτηρίου, καὶ χιτῶνα εὐφροσύνης περιέβαλέ με· ὡς νυμφίῳ περιέθηκέ μοι μίτραν, καὶ ὡς νύμφην κατεκόσμησέ με κόσμῳ· (Ἰσαία 61·10) Πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν.»)

    In the form worn by deacons, subdeacons, altar servers and sometimes by readers, the sticharion is a long robe with wide, loose sleeves, fastened at the neck, and often open down the sides but held shut with buttons or ties. In form it is similar to the dalmatic and tunicle of the Western Church.

    The Latin vestment equivalent to the sticharion is the alb. It too is a long white garment worn by the bishop or priest under the CHASUBLE which itself is equivalent to the Eastern Orthodox FELONION. The alb may be plain or decorated with embroidery or lacework, but in Latin usage is almost always white. (From Orthodox Wiki)

STICHIRON, pl. STICHIRA (στιχηρόν, τό· στιχηρά, τά) Slav. Stixirons, Stixira: A hymn that is preceded by a line or VERSE (in Greek, a STICHOS), from the Psalms. Stichira are always done at VESPERS and the PRAISES (ENI) at Matins. At the APOSTICHA at VESPERS the first Stichiron is sung without a psalm verse. The Aposticha at Vespers on Sundays form an alphabetical acrostic, three letters each week, but the first Stichiron of each Mode does not form part of the acrostic series. (AE)

    The Festal stichira, accompanying both the fixed Psalms at the beginning and end of Vespers and the psalmody of the Eni (Praises or Lauds) in the Morning Office (ORTHROS), exist for all special days of the year, the Sundays and weekdays of Lent, and for the recurrent cycle of eight weeks in the order of the MODES beginning with Pascha (Easter).

*(Printed Page TD-141)*

=== LEAF p1136 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Stichirarion – Stichologia – Stichos – Stole – Strophe – Synapte – Synaxarion Part 1) (p. 1121 / TD-142)]

TD-142

These melodies, preserved in the Stichirarion, are more elaborate and varied than in the tradition of the Irmologion. (“Orthodox Byzantine Music,” Dimitri Conomos, Ph.D. in the GOARCH website (www.goarch.com).

STICHOLOGIA (στιχολογία, ἡ): This is recitation, in sequence, by verse (stichos).

STICHOS (στίχος) Slav. Stix or Stixoslovie: In Greek, the word means a line or row. It is used to describe a VERSE or line of scripture of whatever measure or number of feet. (From http://www.knowledgerush.com/kr/encyclopedia/Stich.)

STOLE: See ORARION, EPITRACHILION, OMOPHORION or VESTMENTS.

*STROFI, spelled STROPHE in English. (στροφή, ἡ): Lit. a turn, bend or twist. In Classical Greek and Latin lyric poetry, a STANZA. It was said to have derived its name from the performance of the lyric of a chorus, in which a strophe or STANZA was sung as the chorus proceeded in its dance in one direction, followed by a second stanza, the antistrophe, corresponding exactly in metre with the strophe, sung when the chorus turned and reversed its dance in the opposite direction. In modern poetry, the strophe becomes synonomous with the stanza.

SYNAPTI (Συναπτή, ἡ): The word derives from the Greek synaptin (συνάπτειν)— to join together. This is the grouping together of a set of petitions each of which asks for a specific blessing from God. See also LITANY.

SYNAXARION (Συναξάριον, τό): The name of a liturgical book in the Greek Orthodox Church. The book contains a collection of short biographies of the Saints for each day in the MINEON. These are read after the KONTAKION in the ORTHROS or morning prayer (MATINS).

    The exact meaning of the term Synaxarion has been different at various times. Its first use was for the index to the Biblical and other lessons to be read in church. In this sense it corresponds to the Latin Capitulare and Comes. Later, the Synaxarion was filled up with the whole text of the Gospel and Apostolos pericopes to be read.

*(Printed Page TD-142)*

=== LEAF p1137 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Synaxarion Concluded Part 2 – Synaxis – Synthronon Part 1) (p. 1122 / TD-143)]

TD-143

As far as the Divine Liturgy was concerned this was replaced by the Gospel and APOSTOLOS books. Synaxarion remained the title for the index to the other lessons. Without changing its name it was filled up with complete texts of these lessons in the same way. As the lessons in the Byzantine Divine Office are always lives of saints, the Synaxarion became the collection of histories of the lives of saints and accounts of events whose memory is meant to be eternally remembered. There are a number of extant medieval Synaxaria manuscripts. The biographies contained in these manuscripts were composed or collected by various authors, one of the most eminent being Symeon Metaphrastes (12th cent). The Synaxarion is not now used as a separate book, as its information has been incorporated in brief sections in the 12 volumes of the MINEON.

*SYNAXIS (σύναξις, ἡ): A public gathering of the faithful or re-union of the faithful to honor a sacred personage that has played an important role in the event commemorated the previous day: e.g., the Synaxis of the John the Forerunner, 7 January, follows the Epiphany (Baptism) of Our Lord; the Synaxis of the Theotokos, 26 December, follows the Nativity of Our Lord, 25 December. It is exactly equivalent to the Latin collecta (from colligere), and similar to the word synagogue (synagoge), the place of reunion.

SYNTHRONON (σύνθρονον, τό): This is the primary THRONE of the Ecumenical Patriarch. It is a raised throne found within the Holy Sanctuary behind the IKONOSTASION and the HOLY TABLE. It is an elevated marble throne surrounded by eleven smaller wooden thrones in an arc on the eastern wall of the SANCTUARY. In the Patriarchal Church, only the Patriarch may sit on it. The other smaller thrones on either side are for the remaining members of the Patriarchal Synod of Bishops. Since some of the marble on the Synthronon dates back to the early fifth century, it may well have been graced by the presence of St. John Chrysostom. The use of a synthronon is an ancient liturgical practice of the Christian Church. It represents the unity of the faithful around the local bishop, who serves as the key celebrant of the Eucharistic gathering. It is also symbolic of the pastoral collegiality of the body of bishops, chaired by the president of the local synod. The episcopal throne therefore symbolizes the teaching au-

*(Printed Page TD-143)*

=== LEAF p1138 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Synthronon Concluded – Taxis – Tabernacle – Teleti – Templon – Thalassidion Part 1) (p. 1123 / TD-144)]

TD-144

thority of the bishop.

*TAXIS (τάξις, ἡ). Same as ORDER OF SERVICE.

TABERNACLE (᾿Αρτοφόριον, τό): See ARTOFORION.

TELETI (τελετή, ἡ): See CEREMONY.

TEMPLON (τέμπλον, τό, pl. τέμπλα, τά): Lit. temple. In today’s churches, the templon is called the IKONOSTASIS. The Byzantine templon was an architectural feature first appearing in Christian churches about the fifth century AD and is still found in some form in all Eastern Orthodox churches today. The templon evolved gradually into the modern IKONOSTASIS. The templon separated the laity in the nave or NAOS from the priests preparing the sacraments at the altar in the SANCTUARY or BEMA. It was usually waist high and composed of carved wood or marble colonnades supporting a horizontal beam on top called an architrave or epistyle. Three doors lead into the sanctuary: a large central one referred to as the BEAUTIFUL GATE through which only the clergy may pass and two smaller doors located at the north and south ends of the templon which may be on the same plane or at right angles to the central gate. The templon did not originally obscure the laity’s view, but as time passed, icons were hung from the beams, curtains were placed in between the colonnetes, and the templon became more and more opaque. It may be covered with icons and can be very elaborate. In the liturgical theology of the Eastern Orthodox Church, it is understood that the Beautiful Gate symbolizes the womb of the Virgin Mary. In some churches, there is a curtain that is drawn closed at certain times during the services especially during the preparation of communion during the Divine Liturgy. The smaller flanking doors at either end of the templon have been called ANGEL DOORS because the Archangels Michael and Gabriel are usually depicted on them; alternatively, they have also been called deacon’s doors because the deacons enter and leave the Sanctuary through them.

THALASSIDION (θαλασσίδιον, τό or χωνευτήριον, τό): This term, known in the west as a piscina or lavabo is cited in the current

*(Printed Page TD-144)*

=== LEAF p1139 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Thalassidion Concluded Part 2 – Lavabo Prayer – Thavmatourgos – Theos Kyrios Part 1) (p. 1124 / TD-145)]

TD-145

IERATIKON (῾Ιερατικόν) of the Greek Orthodox Church as an item located in the DIAKONIKON (SACRISTY). The thalassidion is a sink that drains into a hallowed place in the ground where liquids such as the water used to wash holy things may be poured. The thalassidion is the place where the clergy may wash their hands before serving the Divine Liturgy. However, in Orthodoxy the consecrated elements are never poured into the thalassidion, but must always be consumed by a deacon or priest. The prayer by the celebrants associated with the washing of their hands is “I will wash my hands in innocence and walk around Your altar, O Lord, to hear the voice of praise and declare all Your wonderful works. O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Your house, and the place where Your glory abides. Destroy not my spirit along with the wicked, nor take my life with bloodthirsty men who have crimes on their hands, whose right hand is filled with bribes. As for me, I have walked in innocence; redeem me, Lord, and have mercy on me. My foot is set on a straight path. In the churches I will bless You, Lord.” Psalm 26:6. («Νίψομαι ἐν ἀθῴοις τὰς χεῖράς μου, καὶ κυκλώσω τὸ θυσιαστήριόν Σου, Κύριε, τοῦ ἀκοῦσαί με φωνῆς αἰνέσεώς Σου, καὶ διηγήσασθαι πάντα τὰ θαυμάσιά Σου. Κύριε, ἠγάπησα εὐπρέπειαν οἴκου Σου, καὶ τόπον σκηνώματος δόξης Σου. Μὴ συναπολέσῃς μετὰ ἀσεβῶν τὴν ψυχήν μου, καὶ μετὰ ἀνδρῶν αἱμάτων τὴν ζωήν μου, ὧν ἐν χερσὶν αἱ ἀνομίαι· ἡ δεξιὰ αὐτῶν ἐπλήσθη δώρων. Ἐγὼ δὲ ἐν ἀκακίᾳ μου ἐπορεύθην· λύτρωσαί με, Κύριε, καὶ ἐλέησόν με. Ὁ ποῦς μου ἔστη ἐν εὐθύτητι· ἐν ἐκκλησίαις εὐλογήσω σε, Κύριε.») Ψαλμὸς 25 (26).

    Note that In some ancient churches, the thalassidion was placed under the Holy Table (altar); today, however, it is almost always located in the diakonikon. At one time, before a monk or nun was tonsured, their religious habit would be placed on the thalassidion; now, since the separation of the thalassidion from the Holy Table, the habit is placed on the Holy Table. When a monk or nun is tonsured, if the hair must be disposed of, it is put into the thalassidion.

THAVMATURGOS (Θαυματουργός, ὁ): Miracle worker.

THEOS KYRIOS (Θεὸς Κύριος) Slav. Bog Gospod’: Meaning

*(Printed Page TD-145)*

=== LEAF p1140 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Theos Kyrios Concluded – Theotokarion – Theotokion – Theotokos – Theia Akolouthia – Throne Part 1) (p. 1125 / TD-146)]

TD-146

“God is the Lord” is an abbreviation for a sequence of hymns sung at Orthros (Matins).

THEOTOKARION, THEOTOKARIA (Θεοτοκάριον, τό· pl. Θεοτοκάρια, τά): A Greek Orthodox literary collection containing hymns (troparia) called Theotokia (Θεοτοκία, τά).

THEOTOKION (Θεοτοκίον, τό) pl. THEOTOKIA (Θεοτοκία, τά) Slav. bohorodichnyj: A hymn (TROPARION) or a group of hymns composed in honor of the Theotokos, the Mother of God, Lit. ‘God bearer’. The Theotokion usually concludes a larger body of hymnography, e.g.: troparia at the end of Vespers, stichira for “Lord, I cry out” (Κύριε ἐκέκραξα,) aposticha, etc. Many series of hymns end with a hymn to the Theotokos; this Theotokion often follows the short doxology, “Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen” (Δόξα Πατρί, καὶ Υἱῷ, καὶ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι. Καὶ νῦν, καὶ ἀεί, καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.) and is normally sung in the same Mode as the preceding DOXASTIKON. At Saturday evening vespers, however, the Theotokion at the Entrance is nearly always that of the Mode of the week, regardless of the Mode of the Doxastikon. It is also sung again at Vespers on the following Friday. In Russian usage this Theotokion is called the Dogmatic, whereas in Greek the Dogmaticon (Δογματικόν) is used for the corresponding Theotokion at Small Vespers. (AE)

THEOTOKOS (Θεοτόκος, ἡ): Theotokos is a Greek word meaning “God-bearer.” It is a title assigned to the Virgin Mary by the early Christian Church at the Third Ecumenical Council at Ephesus in 431 A.D. The theological significance at the time was to emphasize that Mary's son, Jesus Christ, was fully God as well as fully human, and that Jesus' two natures (divine and human) were united in the consubstantial and undivided Holy Trinity.

THIA AKOLUTHIA (θεία ἀκολουθία, ἡ): A divine service.

THRONE (Θρόνος, ὁ): As the liturgical tradition of the Orthodox

*(Printed Page TD-146)*
