=== LEAF p151 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Sunday Service — Ninth Ode of the Theotokos (Magnificat), Exapostilaria, Praises (p. 136)]

136

Διάκονος ἐκφωνεῖ, Τὴν θεοτόκον καὶ Μητέρα τοῦ φωτὸς ἐν ὕμνοις τιμῶντες μεγαλύνωμεν· καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσιν εἰς τὸν ἦχον τῶν Καταβασιῶν, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν προτάττοντες ἕνα ἕκαστον ἐκ τῶν Στίχων τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς τῆς Θεοτόκου.
    Α΄) Μεγαλύνει ἡ ψυχή μου τὸν Κύριον καὶ ἠγαλλίασε τὸ πνεῦμά μου ἐπὶ τῷ θεῷ τῷ σωτῆρι μου. [Λουκᾶ 1·46-47]
    Τὴν τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβίμ.
    Β΄) Ὅτι ἐπέβλεψεν ἐπὶ τὴν ταπείνωσιν τῆς δούλης αὑτοῦ· ἰδοὺ γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν μακαριοῦσί με πᾶσαι αἱ γενεαί. [Λουκᾶ 1·48]
    Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
    Γ΄) Ὅτι ἐποίησέ μοι μεγαλεῖα ὁ δυνατὸς καὶ ἅγιον τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ εἰς γενεὰν καὶ γενεὰν τοῖς φοβουμένοις αὐτόν. [Λουκᾶ 1·49-50]
    Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
    Δ΄) Ἐποίησε κράτος ἐν βραχίονι αὐτοῦ, διεσκόρπισεν ὑπερηφάνους διανοίᾳ καρδίας αὐτῶν. [Λουκᾶ 1·51]
    Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
    Ε΄) Καθεῖλε δυνάστας ἀπὸ θρόνων καὶ ὕψωσε ταπεινούς· πεινῶντας ἐνέπλησεν ἀγαθῶν καὶ πλουτοῦντας ἐξαπέστειλε κενούς. [Λουκᾶ 1·52-53]
    Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
    ΣΤ΄) Ἀντελάβετο Ἰσραὴλ παιδὸς αὑτοῦ, μνησθῆναι ἐλέους, καθὼς ἐλάλησε πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας ἡμῶν, τῷ Ἀβραάμ, καὶ τῷ σπέρματι αὐτοῦ ἕως αἰῶνος. [Λουκᾶ 1·54-55]
    Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.

Καὶ ἀκολούθως ψάλλεται καὶ ἡ Θ΄ Καταβασία. Εἶτα ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι, καὶ τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Ὅτι σὲ αἰνοῦσι πᾶσαι αἱ δυνάμεις τῶν οὐρανῶν, καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσιν Ἅγιος Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐκ δευτέρου, εἶτα τὸ Ὑψοῦτε Κύριον τὸν Θεὸν ἡμῶν· καὶ τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἐὰν δὲ ὁ τυχὼν Ἅγιος ἔχῃ Ἐξαποστειλάριον, ψάλλονται μετὰ τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον αὐτοῦ· Μετὰ τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια ψάλλονται οἱ Αἶνοι· ὁ α΄ Χορὸς Πᾶσα πνοὴ αἰνεσάτω τὸν Κύριον· ὁ β΄ Χορός, Αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν πάντες οἱ Ἄγγελοι αὐτοῦ· ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ Δόξα αὕτη ψάλλονται τὰ τῶν Αἴνων η΄ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ μετὰ τῶν ἐφεξῆς στίχων·
    Α΄) Δόξα αὕτη ἔσται πᾶσι τοῖς ὁσίοις αὐτοῦ. Ψαλμὸς ΡΜΘ΄. (9)

*(Printed Page 136)*

=== LEAF p152 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Sunday Service — Ninth Ode of the Theotokos (Magnificat), Exapostilaria, Praises (p. 137)]

137

Choirs sing the three-fold "Lord, have mercy" 4 times. The Priest: Through the mercy and compassion . . . , and immediately the Deacon exclaims "The Theotokos and the Mother of the Light let us magnify in hymns"; and the Choirs sing repeatedly the "More honorable" in the same Mode as the Katavasie, each repetition preceded by one of the following six Verses from the 9th Ode of the Theotokos:
    1. My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. [Luke 1:47]
    "More honorable than the Cherubim."
    2. For he has looked with favor on the lowliness of his servant. Surely, from now on all generations will call me blessed. [Luke 1:48]
    "More honorable than the Cherubim."
    3. For the Mighty One has done great things for me and holy is His Name. His mercy is for those who fear Him, from generation to generation. [Luke 1:49-50]
    "More honorable than the Cherubim."
    4. He has shown strength with his arm; he has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts. [Luke 1:49-50]
    "More honorable than the Cherubim."
    5. He has brought down the powerful from their thrones; and lifted up the lowly; he has filled the hungry with good things, and sent the rich away empty. [Luke 1:52-53]
    "More honorable than the Cherubim."
    6. He has helped His servant Israel, in remembrance of His mercy, according to the promise He made to our ancestors, to Abraham and to his descendants forever. [Luke 1:54-55]
    "More honorable than the Cherubim."

And immediately is sung the 9th Katavasia. Then the Priest: "Again and again," and the Exclamation "For all the powers of heaven praise you." And the Choirs sing "Holy is the Lord our God," 2 times, then "Exalt the Lord our God"; and the Resurrection Exapostilarion with its Theotokion. If the celebrating Saint has an Exapostilarion, then after the Resurrection Exapostilarion we sing the Exapostilarion of the Saint with its Theotokion. After the Exapostilaria, the Praises are sung: the First Choir, "Let everything that has breath praise the Lord"; the Second Choir "Praise Him, all His angels." Beginning with the Verse "This is glory for all His faithful ones," we sing the 8 Resurrection Stichira with the following verses:
    1. This is glory for his faithful ones. [Psalm 149:9]

*(Printed Page 137)*

=== LEAF p153 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Sunday Service — Praises Stichologia, Saint with Praises, Great Doxology, Liturgy Enarxis (p. 138)]

138

    Β΄) Αἰνεῖτε τὸν θεὸν ἐν τοῖς Ἁγίοις αὐτοῦ, αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν ἐν στερεώματι τῆς δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ. Ψαλμὸς ΡΝ΄. (1)
    Γ΄) Αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν ἐπὶ ταῖς δυναστείαις αὐτοῦ, αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῆς μεγαλωσύνης αὐτοῦ. Ψαλμὸς ΡΝ΄. (2)
    Δ΄) Αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν ἐν ἤχῳ σάλπιγγος, αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν ἐν ψαλτηρίῳ καὶ κιθάρᾳ. Ψαλμὸς ΡΝ΄. (4)
    Ε΄) Αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν ἐν τυμπάνῳ καὶ χορῷ, αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν ἐν χορδαῖς καὶ ὀργάνῳ. Ψαλμὸς ΡΝ΄. (4)
    ΣΤ΄) Αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν ἐν κυμβάλοις εὐήχοις, αἰνεῖτε αὐτὸν ἐν κυμβάλοις ἀλαλαγμοῦ. Πᾶσα πνοὴ αἰνεσάτω τὸν Κύριον. Ψαλμὸς ΡΝ΄. (5-6α)
    Ζ΄) Ἀνάστηθι, Κύριε ὁ Θεός μου, ὑψωθήτω ἡ χείρ σου, μὴ ἐπιλάθῃ τῶν πενήτων σου εἰς τέλος. Ψαλμὸς Θ΄. (12)
    Η΄) Ἐξομολογήσομαί σοι, Κύριε, ἐν ὅλῃ καρδίᾳ μου, διηγήσομαι πάντα τὰ θαυμάσιά σου. Ψαλμὸς Θ΄. (1)

Ἐὰν δὲ ὁ Ἅγιος ἔχῃ Αἴνους ψάλλονται ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ [ὁ Βιολάκης γράφει β΄] καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, ἀλλὰ τότε ἀντὶ τῶν ἀνωτέρω ζ΄ καὶ η΄ στίχων λέγονται τοῦ Ἁγίου οἱ κατάλληλοι, οἵτινες ἀπαντῶνται συνήθως ἐν τοῖς Ἀποστίχοις τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ· Εἶτα Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη ὑπάρχεις, Θεοτόκε Παρθένε, ὑμνοῦμέν σε· καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Μ. Δοξολογία εἰς τὸν ἦχον τοῦ Δοξαστικοῦ. Ψαλλομένης τῆς Δοξολογίας λέγει ὁ Διάκονος μυστικῶς τὴν Ἐκτενῆ Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου κτλ. ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι ἐλεήμων καὶ φιλάνθρωπος· ἔτι ὁ Διάκονος Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑωθινὴν δέησιν ἡμῶν τῷ Κυρίῳ κτλ. ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι θεὸς ἐλέους, οἰκτιρμῶν . . . Εἰρήνη πᾶσι· ὁ Διάκονος Τὰς κεφαλὰς ὑμῶν τῷ Κυρίῳ κλίνατε· ὁ Ἱερεὺς τὴν Εὐχὴν Κύριε, ἅγιε, ὁ ἐν ὑψηλοῖς κατοικῶν· τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Σὸν γὰρ ἐστι τὸ ἐλεεῖν καὶ σῴζειν ἡμᾶς, καὶ τὴν Μ. Ἀπόλυσιν. Ὁ δὲ β΄ Χορὸς μετὰ τὴν Δοξολογίαν ψάλλει τὸ Τροπάριον Σήμερον σωτηρία τῷ κόσμῳ γέγονε· καὶ οὕτως ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.

Η ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ
Ὁ Διάκονος Εὐλόγησον Δέσποτα· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Εὐλογημένη ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ πατρός· ὁ Χορὸς ἐπᾴδει τὸ Ἀμὴν μετὰ μέλους· ὁ Διάκονος τὴν Μ. Συναπτὴν Ἐν εἰρήνῃ τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν . . .

*(Printed Page 138)*

=== LEAF p154 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Sunday Service — Praises Stichologia, Saint with Praises, Great Doxology, Liturgy Enarxis (p. 139)]

139

    2. Praise God in His sanctuary; praise Him in His mighty firmament! [Psalm 150:1]
    3. Praise Him for His might deeds; praise Him according to His surpassing greatness! [Psalm 150:2]
    4. Praise Him with trumpet sound; praise Him with lute and harp! [Psalm 150:4]
    5. Praise Him with tambourine and dance; praise Him with strings and pipe! [Psalm 150:4]
    6. Praise Him with clanging cymbals; praise Him with loud clashing cymbals! Let everything that breathes praise the Lord! [Psalm 150:5-6a]
    7. Rise up, O Lord; O God, lift up your hand; do not forget the oppressed. [Psalm 10:12]
    8. I will confess You, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will tell of all your wonderful deeds. [Psalm 9:1]

If the Saint has Praises, then 4 [Violakis writes 2] Resurrection Stichira are sung and 4 of the Saint, but instead of the above verses 7 and 8, the appropriate ones of the Saint are said in that case; these verses are usually found in the Aposticha of Vespers. Then Glory and the Eothinon, Now and ever, "You are truly most blessed,"’* and the Great Doxology is sung in the same Mode as the Doxastikon [Glory Hymn]. While the Doxology is sung the Deacon says the following litany inaudibly: "Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, etc. The Priest: "For You are merciful, O God, and You love mankind"; again the Deacon: "Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord," etc. The Priest: "For You are the God of mercy, of compassion . . . Peace be to all"; the Deacon: "let us bow our heads to the Lord." The Priest says the prayer "O Holy Lord who dwell on high" and then the Exclamation "For it behooves You to be merciful and to save us," and the Great Dismissal. After the Doxology the 2nd Choir sings the hymn "Today salvation has come into the world"; and the Liturgy begins.

THE LITURGY
The Deacon: "Bless, Master"; the Priest: "Blessed is the kingdom of the Father"; the Choir sings thereupon the "Amen" with melody. The Deacon chants the Great Litany "In peace let us pray to

*(Printed Page 139)*

=== LEAF p155 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Sunday Service — Liturgy Great Synapte, Typika Antiphons, Beatitudes Stichologia (p. 140)]

140

Χορῶν ψαλλόντων ἐν ἑκάστῃ Αἰτήσει τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον· μετὰ τὸ τέλος τῆς Συναπτῆς, ὁ Ἱερεὺς τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Ὅτι πρέπει σοι πᾶσα δόξα· καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι τὰ Τυπικά, Εὐλόγει ἡ ψυχή μου τὸν Κύριον εἰς ἦχον πλάγιον τοῦ δ΄· μετὰ τὸ τέλος τοῦ Ψαλμοῦ ὁ Διάκονος Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι σὸν τὸ κράτος· καὶ ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ἄρχεται, εἰς ἦχον β΄ Δόξα τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ τῷ ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, Αἴνει ἡ ψυχή μου τὸν Κύριον· μετὰ τὸ τέλος ὁ Διάκονος Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι ἀγαθὸς καὶ φιλάνθρωπος· καὶ ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ἄρχεται τῶν Μακαρισμῶν οὕτως·

    Ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ σου μνήσθητι ἡμῶν, Κύριε, ὅταν ἔλθῃς ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ σου. Μακάριοι οἱ πτωχοὶ τῷ πνεύματι, ὅτι αὐτῶν ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν.
    Ὁ β΄. Μακάριοι οἱ πενθοῦντες, ὅτι αὐτοὶ παρακληθήσονται.
    Ὁ α΄. Μακάριοι οἱ πρᾳεῖς, ὅτι αὐτοὶ κληρονομήσουσι τὴν γῆν.
    Ὁ β΄. Μακάριοι οἱ πεινῶντες καὶ διψῶντες τὴν δικαιοσύνην, ὅτι αὐτοὶ χορτασθήσονται.
    Ὁ α΄. Μακάριοι οἱ ἐλεήμονες ὅτι αὐτοὶ ἐλεηθήσονται.

(Καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ στίχου τούτου ψάλλονται τὰ τῶν Μακαρισμῶν η΄ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν Μακαρισμῶν· ἂν ὅμως ὁ Ἅγιος τῆς ἡμέρας ᾖ ἑορταζόμενος, λέγονται μόνον τὰ δ΄ πρῶτα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, καὶ ἔπειτα ἐκ τῆς ϛ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου ἕτερα δ΄).
    Ὁ β΄. Μακάριοι οἱ καθαροὶ τῇ καρδίᾳ, ὅτι αὐτοὶ τὸν Θεὸν ὄψονται.
    Ὁ α΄. Μακάριοι οἱ εἰρηνοποιοί, ὅτι αὐτοὶ υἱοὶ Θεοῦ κληθήσονται.
    Ὁ β΄. Μακάριοι οἱ δεδιωγμένοι ἕνεκεν δικαιοσύνης, ὅτι αὐτῶν ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία τῶν Οὐρανῶν.
    Ὁ α΄. Μακάριοί ἐστε, ὅταν ὀνειδίσωσιν ὑμᾶς καὶ διώξωσι, καὶ εἴπωσι πᾶν πονηρὸν ῥῆμα καθ’ ὑμῶν ψευδόμενοι, ἕνεκεν ἐμοῦ.
    Ὁ β΄. Χαίρετε καὶ ἀγαλλιᾶσθε, ὅτι ὁ μισθὸς ὑμῶν πολὺς ἐν τοῖς Οὐρανοῖς.
    Εἶτα ὁ α΄. Δόξα Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱῷ καὶ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι.
    Ὁ β΄. Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεί, καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.

*(Printed Page 140)*

=== LEAF p156 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Sunday Service — Liturgy Great Synapte, Typika Antiphons, Beatitudes Stichologia (p. 141)]

141

the Lord," while the Choirs sing "Lord, have mercy" after each petition; at the end of the Litany, the Priest makes the Exclamation "For to You belong all glory"; and the Choirs sing the Typika "Bless the Lord, O my soul" [Psalm 103 RSV] in Mode IV Plagal. At the end of the Psalm, the Deacon: "Again and again"; the Priest: "For Yours is the dominion"; and the Second Choir begins "Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. Praise the Lord, O my soul!" [Psalm 146 RSV] in Mode II; at the end, the Deacon: "Again and again"; the Priest: "For You are a good and loving God"; and the First Choir begins the Beatitudes as follows:
    In Your kingdom remember us, O Lord, when You come into Your kingdom. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
    2nd Choir: Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
    1st Choir: Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
    2nd Choir: Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.
    1st Choir: Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.
(And from this verse are sung the 8 Resurrection Stichira of the Beatitudes, together with the remaining verses of the Beatitudes; if, however, the Saint of the day is a celebrating one, we chant only the first 4 Resurrection Stichira and then the other 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint.)
    2nd Choir: Blessed are the pure in heart for they will see God.
    1st Choir: Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God.
    2nd Choir: Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
    1st Choir: Blessed are you when people revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account.
    2nd Choir: Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven.
    1st Choir: Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.
    2nd Choir: Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

*(Printed Page 141)*

=== LEAF p157 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Sunday Service — Little Entrance, Trisagion, Epistle, Gospel, Cherubic Hymn, Great Entrance (p. 142)]

142

Ἀμήν.
    Ἡ Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγ. ὁ Διάκονος Σοφία ὀρθοί. Ὁ α΄ Χορὸς Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, ὁ β΄ Χορὸς συμπληροῖ τοῦτο λέγων Ψάλλοντάς σοι, Ἀλληλούϊα· ὁ α΄ Χορὸς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκ. τοῦ ἤχου, ὁ β΄ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου (ἐὰν ἐλέχθη καὶ εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος), εἶτα τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον. Μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ Διάκ. Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, ὁ Χορὸς Κύριε ἐλέησον, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι ἅγιος εἶ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν καὶ σοὶ τὴν δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν... ὁ Χορὸς ἐπᾴδει τὸ Ἀμήν, εἶτα ψάλλεται ὁ Τρισάγιος Ὕμνος³ μεθ’ ὃν ὁ Ἀναγνώστης λέγει τὰ Προκείμενα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ ὁ Διάκονος ἐκφωνεῖ Πρόσχωμεν, σοφία, πρόσχωμεν· καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ὁ Ἀπόστολος. Μετὰ τὸ τέλος, [ὁ Ἱερεὺς ψάλλει Εἰρήνη σοι τῷ ἀναγινώσκοντι,] Ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα ἐκ τρίτου εἰς ἦχον β΄, ὁ δὲ Ἱερ. ἱστάμενος ἔμπροσθεν τῆς Ὡραίας Πύλης ἐκφωνεῖ (ἐὰν μὴ ᾖ ἕτερος Διάκονος) Σοφία, ὀρθοί, ἀκούσωμεν τοῦ ἁγίου Εὐαγγελίου, ὁ Ἱερ. Εἰρήνη πᾶσι, οἱ Χοροὶ Καὶ τῷ Πνεύματί σου, ὁ δὲ Διάκονος ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἄμβωνος⁴ λέγει Ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ . . . ἁγίου Εὐαγγ. τὸ ἀνάγνωσμα, ὁ Ἱερ. (ἐὰν μὴ ᾖ ἄλλος διάκονος) Πρόσχωμεν, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Εὐαγγέλ. Μετὰ τὸ τέλος, ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει μετὰ μέλους τὸ Δόξα σοι Κύριε δόξα σοι, ὁ Διάκ. τὴν Ἐκτενῆ Εἴπωμεν πάντες ἐξ ὅλης τῆς ψυχῆς . . . μετὰ τῶν κατηχουμένων, τοῦ Ἱερέως ἐκφωνοῦντος ἑκάστοτε τὴν ὡρισμένην Ἐκφώνησιν. Μετὰ δὲ τὸ Ὅπως ὑπὸ τοῦ κράτους σου πάντοτε φυλαττόμενοι . . . ἄρχεται ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλων μετὰ μέλους, ἀλλὰ καὶ μετ’ εὐλαβείας καὶ κατανύξεως, εἰς τὸν ἦχον τῆς ἡμέρας τὸν Χερουβικὸν Ὕμνον·

    Οἱ τὰ Χερουβὶμ μυστικῶς εἰκονίζοντες καὶ τῇ Ζωοποιῷ Τριάδι τὸν Τρισάγιον ὕμνον προσᾴδοντες πᾶσαν τὴν βιωτικὴν ἀποθώμεθα μέριμναν (τὸ ἐπίλοιπον τοῦ ὕμνου ψάλλει ὁ β΄ Χορὸς) ὡς τὸν Βασιλέα τῶν ὅλων ὑποδεξόμενοι ταῖς ἀγγελικαῖς ἀοράτως δορυφορούμενον τάξεσιν· Ἀλληλούϊα.
    Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τῶν Ἁγίων, ὁ Διάκονος Πληρώσωμεν τὴν δέησιν ἡμῶν τῷ Κυρίῳ. Ὑπὲρ τῶν προτεθέντων τιμίων δώρων κτλ. Εἰς τὸ τέλος ὁ Ἱερ. τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Διὰ τῶν οἰκτιρμῶν τοῦ μονογενοῦς σου Υἱοῦ καὶ εὐθὺς Εἰρήνη πᾶσι, οἱ Χοροὶ Καὶ τῷ πνεύματί σου.
    Ὁ Διάκονος· Ἀγαπήσωμεν ἀλλήλους, ἵνα ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ ὁμολογήσωμεν.
    Ὁ α΄ Χορός· Πατέρα Υἱὸν καὶ Ἅγιον Πνεῦμα, Τριάδα

*(Printed Page 142)*

=== LEAF p158 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Sunday Service — Little Entrance, Trisagion, Epistle, Gospel, Cherubic Hymn, Great Entrance (p. 143)]

143

Then the [Small] Entrance with the Gospel is performed. The Deacon: "Wisdom. Let us be attentive." The First Choir: "O Come let us worship and bow down to Christ. Save us O Son of God, who are risen from the dead"; the Second Choir completes the Isodikon [Entrance Hymn] with ". . . us who sing to You: Alleluia." The First Choir chants the Resurrection Apolytikion of the Mode, the Second Choir that of the Saint of the day (if it was chanted at "God is the Lord" [at the beginning of Matins]), then that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion. After these, the Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord"; the Choir: "Lord, have mercy"; The Priest: "For You are holy, our God, and to You we give glory, . . . ." The Choir: "Amen" and the Trisagios Hymn follows,³ after which the Reader says the Prokimena of the Apostolos and the Deacon exclaims "Let us be attentive. Wisdom. Let us be attentive"; and then the Apostolos selection is read. At the end, [the Priest intones "Praise be unto you, the Reader"] and the Second Choir sings "Alleluia" (3 times) in the Second Mode. The Priest, standing before the Royal Gate, exclaims (if there is not another Deacon serving): Wisdom. Arise. Let us hear the holy Gospel"; the Priest: "Peace be with all"; the Choirs: "And with your spirit." The Deacon from the Pulpit⁴ says: "The reading is from the holy Gospel according to ___"; the Priest (if there is not another deacon): "Let us be attentive" and the Gospel is read. At the end, the First Choir sings with melody "Glory to You, O Lord, glory to You." The Deacon chants the Litany "Let us say with all our soul . . ." including the Litany for the Catechumens, the Priest exclaiming each time the appropriate Exclamation. After the Priest chants "And grant that always guarded by Your power," the First Choir sings with melody, but also with reverence and piety, in the Mode of the day, the Cherubic Hymn:
    We who mystically represent the Cherubim and sing the thrice-holy hymn to the life-creating Trinity, let us set aside all the cares of life (the rest of the hymn the Second Choir sings) that we may receive the King of all, invisibly escorted by the angelic hosts. Alleluia.

    After the [Great] Entrance of the Gifts, the Deacon: "Let us complete our prayer to the Lord. For the precious gifts here presented, etc." At the end, the Priest chants the Exclamation "Through the mercies of Your only-begotten Son" and immediately "Peace be with all"; the Choirs: "And with your spirit."
    The Deacon: "Let us love one another that with one mind we may confess."
    The First Choir: "Father, Son and Holy Spirit, Trinity one in

*(Printed Page 143)*

=== LEAF p159 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Sunday Service — Creed, Anaphora, Epiclesis, Axion Estin, Diptychs (p. 144)]

144

ὁμοούσιον καὶ ἀχώριστον.
    Ὁ Διάκονος Τὰς θύρας, τὰς θύρας· ἐν σοφίᾳ πρόσχωμεν.
    Ὁ Προϊστάμενος λέγει εὐλαβῶς καὶ εὐκρινῶς τὸ Σύμβολον τῆς πίστεως· μεθ’ ὅ ὁ Διάκονος ἐκφωνεῖ·
    Στῶμεν καλῶς, στῶμεν μετὰ φόβου· πρόσχωμεν τὴν ἁγίαν ἀναφορὰν ἐν εἰρήνῃ προσφέρειν.
    Ὁ α΄ Χορός· Ἔλεον εἰρήνης, θυσίαν αἰνέσεως.
    Ὁ Ἱερεύς· Ἡ χάρις τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ Πατρός, καὶ ἡ κοινωνία τοῦ Ἁγίου Πνεύματος εἴη μετὰ πάντων ἡμῶν.
    Ὁ β΄ Χορός· Καὶ μετὰ τοῦ πνεύματός σου.
    Ὁ Ἱερεύς· Ἄνω σχῶμεν τὰς καρδίας.
    Ὁ α΄ Χορός· Ἔχομεν πρὸς τὸν Κύριον.
    Ὁ Ἱερεύς· Εὐχαριστήσωμεν τῷ Κυρίῳ.
    Ὁ β΄ Χορός· Ἄξιον καὶ δίκαιον.
    Ὁ Ἱερεύς· Τὸν ἐπινίκιον ὕμνον ᾄδοντα κτλ.
    Ὁ α΄ Χορός· Ἅγιος, Ἅγιος, Ἅγιος Κύριος Σαββαώθ, πλήρης ὁ Οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ τῆς δόξης σου· ὡσαννὰ ἐν τοῖς ὑψίστοις. Εὐλογημένος ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου, Ὡσαννὰ ὁ ἐν τοῖς ὑψίστοις.
    Ὁ Ἱερεύς· Λάβετε, φάγετε· τοῦτό μού ἐστι τὸ Σῶμα.
    Ὁ β΄ Χορός· Ἀμήν.
    Ὁ Ἱερεύς· Πίετε ἐξ αὐτοῦ πάντες· τοῦτό ἐστι τὸ αἷμά μου.
    Ὁ α΄ Χορός· Ἀμήν.
    Ὁ Ἱερεύς· Τὰ σὰ ἐκ τῶν σῶν σοὶ προσφέρομεν κατὰ πάντα καὶ διὰ πάντα.
    Ὁ β΄ Χορός· Σὲ ὑμνοῦμεν, σὲ εὐλογοῦμεν, σοὶ εὐχαριστοῦμεν, Κύριε, καὶ δεόμεθά σου ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν.
    Ὁ Ἱερεύς· Ἐξαιρέτως τῆς Παναγίας, ἀχράντου, ὑπερευλογημένης, ἐνδόξου, δεσποίνης ἡμῶν, Θεοτόκου καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας.
    Καὶ ὁ α΄ Χορ. ψάλλει, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν ὡς ἀληθῶς εἰς ἦχον β΄· μεθ’ ὅ ὁ Ἱερεὺς ἐκφωνεῖ Ἐν πρώτοις μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν κτλ. οἱ Χορ. Κύριε ἐλέησον· ὁ Διάκ. Καὶ ὧν ἕκαστος κατὰ διάνοιαν ἔχει, καὶ πάντων καὶ πασῶν· οἱ Χορ. Κύριε ἐλέησον [ἢ, ὡς μεταγενεστέρους χρόνους, καὶ πάντων καὶ πασῶν]. ὁ Ἱερ. Καὶ δὸς ἡμῖν ἐν ἑνὶ στόματι καὶ μιᾷ καρδίᾳ δοξάζειν... Καὶ ἔσται τὰ ἐλέη τοῦ μεγάλου Θεοῦ· οἱ Χορ. Καὶ μετὰ τοῦ πνεύματός σου· ὁ Διάκ.

*(Printed Page 144)*

=== LEAF p160 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Sunday Service — Creed, Anaphora, Epiclesis, Axion Estin, Diptychs (p. 145)]

145

essence and inseparable.
    The Deacon: "Guard the doors. In wisdom, let us be attentive."
    The Proistamenos recites the Creed with piety and clarity; after this, the Deacon exclaims:
    "Let us stand well. Let us stand in awe. Let us be attentive, that we may present the holy offering in peace."
    The First Choir: "A Mercy of peace, a sacrifice of praise."
    The Priest: "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with all of you."
    The Second Choir: "And with your spirit"
    The Priest: "Let us lift up our hearts."
    The First Choir: "We lift them up to the Lord."
    The Priest: "Let us give thanks to the Lord."
    The Second Choir: "It is proper and right."
    The Priest: "Singing the victory hymn," etc.
    The First Choir: "Holy, holy, holy, Lord Sabaoth, heaven and earth are filled with Your glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest."
    The Priest: "Take, eat; this is my Body . . ."
    The Second Choir: "Amen."
    The Priest: "Drink of this all of you; this is my blood . . ."
    The First Choir: "Amen."
    The Priest: "We offer to You these gifts from Your own gifts in all and for all."
    The Second Choir: "We praise You, we bless You, we give thanks to You, and we pray to You, Lord our God."
    The Priest: "Especially for our most holy, pure, blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary."
    And the First Choir sings "It is meet and right . . ." in Mode II, after which the Priest exclaims "Above all remember, Lord, our Archbishop . . ." The Choirs: "Lord, have mercy"; the Deacon: "Remember also, Lord, those whom each of us calls to mind and all your people"; the Choirs: "Lord, have mercy" [or, in more recent times, "and all your people."] The Priest: "And grant that with one voice and one heart we may glorify . . . ; And the mercies of our great God"; the Choirs: "And with your spirit";

*(Printed Page 145)*
