=== LEAF p541 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation XII Concl. (§§ 31–32), Situation XIII (§ 33), Situation XIV Opening (§ 34) (p. 526)]

526

αἱ Καταβασίαι Θάλασσαν ἔπηξας, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου.
32.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς νομικῆς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΙΓ΄.

33.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, ἐν τῇ περιπτώσει ταύτῃ ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς καταλιμπάνεται⁶ καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῆς Ἀναστασίμου καὶ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος κατὰ τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Παραλύτου (ἐν περιπτώσει Θ΄ § 23-25), τὰ Δοξαστικά, τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος. Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, Καθίσματα, εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν Ἀναβλέψασαι τοῦ τάφου, Δόξα, Ἀνέτειλεν ἰδού, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνέστης ὡς Ἀθάνατος. Εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν Ἐκ τῶν ἄνω κατελθών, Δόξα, Πόθῳ ζέοντι, Καὶ νῦν, Ἑκουσίᾳ σου βουλῇ. Εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν Γεωργήσας ἐμμελῶς, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Κατεπλάγη Ἰωσήφ, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἡ πηγὴ τῆς ζωαρχίας κτλ. (Ὅρα ἐν τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Παραλύτου).

ΙΔ΄.

34.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν τῇ Ἀποδόσει τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, ἡ

6. Μόνον τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς ψάλλεται ἔν τε τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ καὶ ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίου.

*(Printed Page 526)*

=== LEAF p542 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation XII Concl. (§§ 31–32), Situation XIII (§ 33), Situation XIV Opening (§ 34) (p. 527)]

527

“Drowning the prideful Pharaoh,” then “More honorable.” The Exapostilaria: of the Saint and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saint.
32.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saint, and that of the Saint of the Church, the Kontakion “Of the Feast of the law”; the Apostolos and the Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.

SITUATION THIRTEEN

33.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Sunday of The Samaritan Woman, the Service of Mid-Pentecost is omitted⁶ and the Service of the Saint is chanted together with that of the Resurrection and the Samaritan Woman, according to the order of the Sunday of the Paralytic (Situation Nine, Paragraphs 23 - 25); Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Samaritan Woman. Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and of Mid-Pentecost. In Matins, Kathismata of the First Stasis [Stichologia] “Having beheld the entrance to the grave,” Glory, “Behold, the spring-time of grace has dawned,” Now and ever, “Being immortal, You were risen.” At the Second Stasis, “Descending from on high,” Glory, “Ablaze with the desire,” Now and ever, “Of Your own free will.” At the Third Stasis, “Studiously cultivating,” Glory, Now and ever, “Joseph was amazed.” Exapostilaria: of Easter, of the Saint and of the Samaritan Woman. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Resurrection and 3 of the Saint, and the Stichira of Pascha “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “The Well-spring of the principle of life,” etc. (See the Sunday of the Paralytic.)

SITUATION FOURTEEN

34.    If the Feast of Saint George occurs on the Leave-taking of Mid-

6. Only the Apolytikion of the Feast is sung in Vespers and Matins instead of the Theotokion.

*(Printed Page 527)*

=== LEAF p543 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation XIV Concl. (§ 34), Situation XV (§§ 35–37) (p. 528)]

528

Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν περιπτώσει ΙΑ΄ § 27-29 διάταξιν. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον. Ἀντὶ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου· Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἀλλότριον τῶν μητέρων, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπόλυσις καὶ Ἀπόδοσις.

ΙΕ΄.

35.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Πέμπτῃ μετὰ τὴν Ἀπόδοσιν τῆς Μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, τῇ Τετάρτῃ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ ς΄ Στιχηρὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Παρὰ τὸ φρέαρ τοῦ Ἰακώβ, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα καὶ τὸ Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος ἀπόκρυφον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

36.    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἐς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀγαλλιάσθω σήμερον φαιδρῶς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου δίς, καὶ Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἀνέτειλεν ἰδού, καὶ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος {Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,} Ἀγαλλιάσθω Οὐρανός· εἰς τὴν β΄ Πόθῳ ζέοντι καὶ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος {Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,} Ἐκ φρέατος νάματα (ζήτει τῇ Παρασκευῇ μετὰ τὴν Κυριακήν)· εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν Γεωργήσας ἐμμελῶς, καὶ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος {Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν} Ὡς τῇ πηγῇ Σαμαρείτιδι (ζήτει τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος κτλ. ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Δ΄ § 11), ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ δ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἡ πηγὴ τῆς ζωαρχίας, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου.

37.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα, καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον Ἀπολυτίκιον, Τὸ φαιδρὸν τῆς Ἀναστάσεως, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ

*(Printed Page 528)*

=== LEAF p544 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation XIV Concl. (§ 34), Situation XV (§§ 35–37) (p. 529)]

529

Pentecost, the Service is celebrated according to the order in Situation Eleven, Paragraphs 27 - 29. In Matins, Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the Minologion. Instead of “More honorable,” we chant the 9th Ode of the Feast and that of the Saint; Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “Virginity is alien to mothers,” Communion Hymn of the Feast, Dismissal and Leave-taking.

SITUATION FIFTEEN

35.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Thursday following the Leaving-taking of Mid-Pentecost, on Wednesday evening, after the First Stasis of the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the six Stichira of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “By Jacob’s well,” the Readings, the Aposticha and the Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Samaritan Woman. The Apolytikion of the Saint “The Mystery hidden from eternity” and the Dismissal.
36.    Thursday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint; Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “Let Heaven and earth radiantly rejoice today,” the Apolytikion of the Saint, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion of the Saint twice, and “The mystery hidden before all time,” the Psalter and the Polyeleos. Kathismata of the First Stasis [Stichologia] those of the Saint “Behold, the springtime of grace has dawned” and of the Samaritan Woman “Let Heaven joyfully resound” {Sunday Matins Kathisma of the Third Ode}. At the Second Stasis “Ablaze with the desire” and of the Samaritan Woman {Glory, Now and ever,} “Waters from the well,” (see the Friday after the Sunday of the Samaritan Woman in the Pentikostarion.) At the Third Stasis “Studiously cultivating,” and that of the Samaritan Woman, {Glory, Now and ever}, “Even as You did open the source to the Samaritan Woman” (see Thursday of this week in the Pentikostarion, etc., as prescribed in Situation 4, Paragraph 11 on the Sunday of Thomas); the Canon of Easter and that of the Saint. The Katavasie of Pascha, then “More honorable”; Exapostilaria of the Saint and of the Samaritan Woman. At the Praises: 4 Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “The Well-spring of the principle of life,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saint.
37.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion “Having learned the joyful proclamation,” the Apolytikion of the Saint, the Apolytikion of the

*(Printed Page 529)*

=== LEAF p545 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer Concl. Note; St. Mark the Apostle and Evangelist (April 25); Situation I (§§ 1–2) (p. 530)]

530

Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Πεντηκοσταρίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Δευτέρας τῆς Διακαινησίμου μέχρι τῆς Πέμπτης τῆς ἑβδομάδος τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος. (Ὅρα τὸν τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακα).

Τῇ ΚΕ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀποστόλου καὶ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Μάρκου.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἀποστόλου τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου, ἡ Ἀκολουθία μετατίθεται καὶ ψάλλεται τῇ Τρίτῃ ὡς ἑξῆς. Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου ἑσπέρας εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου δ΄. Δόξα, Οἱ ἀναξίως ἑστῶτες (ἢ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου ἐὰν ἑορτάζηται), Καὶ νῦν, Πῶς μὴ θαυμάσωμεν. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ Οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Ὁ τῷ πάθει σου Χριστέ, καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, αὖθις Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Τῇ Τρίτῃ πρωῒ μετὰ τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ τὴν Μ. Συναπτὴν⁷ ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, ἡ Καταβασία εἰς τέλος ἑκάστης Ὠδῆς καὶ ἡ Αἴτησις, ὡς εἴθισται· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα χῦμα, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ τρίς, ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα μόνη, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ αὖθις τοῦ Πάσχα. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Ἀποστόλου γ΄, καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν· Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρίς, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία κατὰ τὴν τάξιν τῆς Διακαινησίμου ἑβδομάδος, Ἀπόστολος τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, κλπ. Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. (Αὕτη ἡ τάξις εἶναι

*(Printed Page 530)*

=== LEAF p546 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer Concl. Note; St. Mark the Apostle and Evangelist (April 25); Situation I (§§ 1–2) (p. 531)]

531

Saint of the Church; the Kontakion “Though You went down into the tomb”; the Apostolos and the Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.
    Note that the Feast of Saint George may occur in the Pentikostarion from the Monday of Bright Week until the Thursday of the Samaritan Woman. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

25th - The Holy Apostle Mark the Evangelist.

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Feast of the Apostle occurs on Monday of Bright Week, the Service is transferred to and is sung on Tuesday as follows: On Monday evening of Bright Week, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Apostle, Glory, “We who stand unworthily” (or the Glory of the Apostle if the Church is named in his honor), Now and ever, “How can we not marvel.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon “Our God is in Heaven and on earth.” At the Aposticha: the Resurrection “O Christ, Who by Your Passion,” and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection.” The Apolytikia: “Christ is risen, the Apolytikion of the Apostle, and again “Christ is risen” and Dismissal.
2.    On Tuesday morning, after “Christ is risen” and the Great Litany,⁷ we do the Canon of Pascha and that of the Apostle; the Katavasia at the end of each Ode and the Petition, as customary. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi and the Kontakion of Pascha are read; after the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Apostle, and the Minologion. Then “Having beheld the Resurrection” 3 times, and the 9th Ode of Pascha. The Exapostilaria: of Easter, of the Apostle, and of Easter. At the Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, and 3 of the Apostle and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Apostle, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” “Christ is risen” 3 times. The Liturgy proceeds according to the order of Bright Week, Apostolos of the day and Gospel of the Apostle, etc. {This appears to be a reversal of the usual custom of Apostolos of the

*(Printed Page 531)*

=== LEAF p547 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. Mark the Apostle and Evangelist (April 25); Situation I Concl. (§ 2 Note), Situation II (§§ 3–4), Situation III Opening (§§ 5–6) (p. 532)]

532

ἀντίστροφος τῆς συνήθους τάξεως, δηλ. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς ἢ τῆς ἡμέρας, ὅπως εἰς τὴν Ἀκολουθίαν τοῦ Ἁ. Γεωργίου.)
    Καὶ κατὰ τὰς λοιπὰς τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης ἡμέρας, ἡ αὐτὴ τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ Ἀποστόλου τηρεῖται τάξις.

Β΄.

3.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Θωμᾶ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Στιχηρὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ψάλλομεν ς΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου δ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου (εἰ βούλει). Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου γ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς κτλ. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς (τοῦ Πάσχα), τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς· Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, καὶ καθεξῆς τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς.
    Τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ Ἀποστόλου κατὰ τὰς μεθεόρτους ἡμέρας τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης ὅρα ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ Ἁγίου Γεωργίου.

Γ΄.

5.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Μυροφόρων, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῶν Μυροφόρων γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου γ΄. Δόξα τῶν Μυροφόρων, Καὶ νῦν, Παρῆλθεν ἡ σκιά. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν, Σὲ τὸν ἀναβαλλόμενον τὸ φῶς, Ἀπολυτίκια Ὅτε κατῆλθες, Ὁ εὐσχήμων Ἰωσήφ, Ἀπόστολε Ἅγιε, Ταῖς Μυροφόροις γυναιξὶ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

6.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ, εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα (εἰ βούλει καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου) μετὰ τῶν β΄ θεοτοκίων, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῶν Μυροφόρων, τοῦ

*(Printed Page 532)*

=== LEAF p548 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. Mark the Apostle and Evangelist (April 25); Situation I Concl. (§ 2 Note), Situation II (§§ 3–4), Situation III Opening (§§ 5–6) (p. 533)]

533

Saint and Gospel of the Feast or of the day, as in St. George} etc., Communion Hymn “Body of Christ,” “Christ is risen,” and Dismissal.
    The service of the Apostle is celebrated In this manner when his Feast falls on any day of Bright Week.

SITUATION TWO

3.    If the Feast of the Apostle Mark occurs on the Sunday of Thomas, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the six Stichira of the Feast and 4 of the Apostle. Glory, Now and ever of the Feast. At the Aposticha: Glory of the Apostle, Now and ever of the Feast. Apolytikia: of the Feast, of the Apostle, and again of the Feast, and the Dismissal.
4.    On Sunday at Matins at “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Canon of the Feast and that of the Apostle (if desired). Exapostilaria: of the Feast, of the Apostle, and the other of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Apostle, Glory, Now and ever of the Feast, etc. In the Liturgy, after the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, the Apolytikion of the Apostle, and the Kontakion of the Feast {of Pascha}; the Apostolos of the Apostle and the Gospel of the Sunday and the following hymns of the Feast.
    For the order of the Service of the Apostle for the Post-feast days of this week, see the Feast of Saint George.

SITUATION THREE

5.    If the Feast of Saint Mark occurs on the Sunday of The Myrrhbearers, on Saturday evening, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the four Stichira of the Resurrection, three of the Myrrhbearers and 3 of the Apostle. Glory of the Myrrhbearers, Now and ever, “The shadow of the Law has passed.” At the Aposticha: Glory of the Apostle, Now and ever, “You Who puts on light as a garment.” The Apolytikia: “When You did descend unto death,” “The noble Joseph,” “O Holy Apostle,” “Unto the myrrhbearing women,” and the Dismissal.
6.    On Sunday at “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Canon of Pascha, (and of the Apostle if desired) with two Theotokia. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Myrrhbearers, that of the Apostle and the

*(Printed Page 533)*

=== LEAF p549 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. Mark the Apostle and Evangelist (April 25); Situation III Concl. (§ 6), Situation IV (§§ 7–8), Situation V Opening (§ 9) (p. 534)]

534

Ἀποστόλου, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῶν Μυροφόρων κτλ. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Ἀποστόλου γ΄ καὶ τὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, Σήμερον σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα, καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια τῶν Μυροφόρων, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς κτλ. Κοινωνικὸν Σῶμα Χριστοῦ, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Δ΄.

7.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῶν Μυροφόρων, ἢ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης, ἐν τῷ ἑσπερινῷ Προσόμοια τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου τῆς ἡμέρας γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου. Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Μυροφόρων, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα καὶ τὸ Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Μυροφόρων, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια Ὁ εὐσχήμων Ἰωσήφ, Ἀπόστολε Ἅγιε, Ταῖς μυροφόροις γυναιξὶ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

8.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὰ Καθίσματα τῆς ἡμέρας ἐκ τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ὁ Κανὼν τῶν Μυροφόρων καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ τῶν Μυροφόρων. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Μυροφόρων, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Μυροφόρων καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια τῶν Μυροφόρων, τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον τῶν Μυροφόρων, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

9.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Παραλύτου ἢ τῆς Σαμαρείτιδος, τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας ὅρα ἀνωτέρω ἐν τῇ τῶν Μυροφόρων

*(Printed Page 534)*

=== LEAF p550 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. Mark the Apostle and Evangelist (April 25); Situation III Concl. (§ 6), Situation IV (§§ 7–8), Situation V Opening (§ 9) (p. 535)]

535

other of the Myrrhbearers, etc. Exapostilaria: of Pascha, of the Apostle and of the Myrrhbearers. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Resurrection and 3 of the Apostle, and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.” And immediately follows the Liturgy, in which we sing the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the three Apolytikia of the Myrrhbearers, the Apolytikion of the Apostle, the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Though You went down into the tomb.” The Apostolos of the Apostle and the Gospel of the Sunday, etc. Communion Hymn “Body of Christ,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal.

SITUATION FOUR

7.    If the Feast of Saint Mark occurs on Monday of the Myrrhbearers or on any day of this week, at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing three Prosomia of the day from the Pentikostarion and 3 of the Apostle, Glory of the Apostle, Now and ever of the Myrrhbearers. The Aposticha and the Glory of the Apostle, Now and ever of the Myrrhbearers. Apolytikia: “The noble Joseph,” “O Holy Apostle,” and “Unto the myrrhbearing women” and the Dismissal.
8.    In Matins, at “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; the Kathismata of the day from the Pentikostarion. The “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ,” Psalm 50, the Canons of the Myrrhbearers and of the Apostle. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Apostle and that of the Myrrhbearers; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Apostle and the Minologion. The Katavasie of Pascha, then “More honorable.” The Exapostilaria of the Apostle and of the Myrrhbearers. At the Praises: the Prosomia of the Apostle, Glory of the Apostle, Now and ever of the Myrrhbearers, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Myrrhbearers. And immediately follows the Liturgy, in which are sung the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia of the Myrrhbearers, the Apolytikion of the Apostle, the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion of the Myrrhbearers. The Apostolos and the Gospel of the Apostle. “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “In all the earth,” “Christ is risen,” and Dismissal.
9.    If the Feast of Saint Mark occurs on either the Sunday of the Paralytic or the Sunday of the Samaritan Woman, for the order of the

*(Printed Page 535)*
