=== LEAF p1021 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Anastasimon Apolytikion Concluded – Anatolikon – Anavathmi – Angel – Angel Doors – Anointment – Anthologion Part 1) (p. 1006 / TD-27)]

TD-27

Byzantine Modes and sung in alternate succession from Sunday to Sunday throughout the church year as part of the Cycle of Modes (see MODE). Although this cycle commences on Easter Sunday, the Anastasima Apolytikia begin to be sung on the Third Sunday of Easter (Sunday of the Myrrh Bearers) with Ὅτε κατῆλθες (Ote Katilthes) in Mode II. In the Divine Liturgy on Sundays, the Anastasimon Apolytikion is usually sung immediately before and after the Small Entrance.

ANATOLIKON, (᾿Ανατολικόν, τό) pl. ANATOLIKA (᾿Ανατολικά, τά): A hymn or the group of hymns of the Praises (ENI) sung in Sunday Matins (ORTHROS) and addressed to the Lord. The name derives from two possible sources: 1. From the Verse “Dawn is His name” («᾿Ανατολὴ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ»); or 2. The name of their possible author, Anatolios.

ANAVATHMOS (ἀναβαθμός, ὁ), pl. ANAVATHMI (ἀναβαθμοί, οἱ) Slav. Stepenny Antifony: A short hymn or series of hymns, based on the Psalms of Ascent (Gr. Anavathmi) numbered 119-133, which are sung at Orthros on Sundays, and Feasts with a Gospel. On Sundays they are divided into three Antiphons, except for Mode VIII, which has four. They are sung immediately before the Prokimenon. On Feasts, only the first Antiphon of Mode IV is used. In some churches the final hymn from the Second Antiphon in Mode IV is used rather than repeating the third Antiphon. (adapted from AE).

ANGEL (῎Αγγελος, ὁ, pl. ῎Αγγελοι, οἱ): Pure bodiless spirits created by God to serve and praise Him.

ANGEL DOORS. See TEMPLON.

ANOINTMENT (χρῖσμα) Slav. Eleopomazanie: The act of tracing a mark in the form of a cross, using Holy Oil. This act is performed on a person or an article in a Church ceremony.

ANTHOLOGION (ἀνθολογίον, τό) Slav. Sbornik Anfologion, Cvetoslov: An anthology or collection of texts. This type of text attempts to encompass as much of the basic liturgical text as pos-

*(Printed Page TD-27)*

=== LEAF p1022 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Anthologion Concluded – Antidoron – Antiminsion Part 1) (p. 1007 / TD-28)]

TD-28

sible. One example of this is a book titled The Great and Holy Synekdimos (Μέγας καὶ ῾Ιερὸς Συνέκδημος) published and reprinted several times by the publishing firm Astir in Athens, and only by this firm. A Slavonic example is the Velikij Sbornik.

ANTIDORON (ἀντίδωρον, τό) Slav. Antidor: Lit. ‘instead of the gift.’ This is unsanctified bread which is offered to the people after the conclusion of the Divine Liturgy.

ANTIMINSION (᾿Αντιμήνσιον, τό) Slav. Antimins: The Antiminsion of today is a rectangular piece of cloth, of linen or silk, into which is sewn the incorruptible relic of a Saint or Martyr, making real the early liturgical connection with the Martyrs who died rather than renounce Christ, and whose blood, after the Blood of Christ, formed the very foundation of the Church. The antiminsion has representations of the entombment of Christ, the four Evangelists, and scriptural passages related to the Eucharist. The antiminsion is usually wrapped in another protective cloth, usually of silk, called the ILITON; often red in color, it symbolizes the swaddling-clothes with which Christ was wrapped after His birth or the winding-sheet or shroud in which His body was wrapped after His Crucifixion.

The antiminsion must be consecrated and signed by the head of the church (a Patriarch or Archbishop) and is placed on the ALTAR TABLE during its consecration. No sacrament, especially the Divine Liturgy, can be performed without a consecrated antiminsion.

The word Antiminsion is a combination of Greek and Latin meaning ‘in place of the table’. While the HOLY TABLES were always to have been consecrated with RELICS placed inside of them, it was not always possible for the Bishop to visit each community to do so. For this reason, Bishops could consecrate these cloths or boards and send them to communities to be used in place of a consecrated Holy Table. This also allowed for portable Holy Tables for travelers. Military Chaplains and Missionaries may also use an Antiminsion instead of the table when serving in remote areas.

As mentioned, before being used the Antiminsion must be con-

*(Printed Page TD-28)*

=== LEAF p1023 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Antiminsion Concluded – Antiphon – Antiri – Apichima) (p. 1008 / TD-29)]

TD-29

secrated. This may take place as a part of the Consecration of a church, or in a separate service. In this rite, the bishop annoints a pocket sewn into the Antiminsion in which to place the Relics of the saints and Chrism. The bishop then seals them in place with wax mastic. He may also stamp it with his official seal. He then inscribes the Antiminsion with the name of the church for which it has been consecrated and signs it. Printed on every Antiminsion are the words “By the grace of the All-Holy, Life-giving Spirit, this Antiminsion, the Holy Table, is consecrated for the Offering on it of the Body and Blood of our Lord in the Divine Liturgy.”

The Antiminsion always remains under the control of the consecrating Bishop. He bestows an Antiminsion and Chrism on a priest as a sign that the community exists as an Orthodox parish and that the priest has his authorization to celebrate the Sacred Mysteries. If a Bishop withdraws this authorization from the priest, he also removes the antiminsion.

*ANTIPHON (ἀντίφωνον, τό), pl. ANTIPHONA (ἀντίφωνα, τά) Slav. Antifon: A brief hymn sung alternately by two choral groups or chanters in response to each other, that is, antiphonally.

ANTIRI (ἀντίρι, τό) Slav. Podrjaznik: An inner CASSOCK, that does not have buttons down the front as does the Roman cassock. It is usually black and is worn at all times by Eastern Monastics. It also may be worn with a vest. See also VESTMENT(S).

APICHIMA (ἀπήχημα also προήχημα, ἐνήχημα): A term in Byzantine music for an intonation formula meant to be used as a short mnemonic. It is a melodic phrase normally sung by the Archcantor or Protopsaltis alone and without an accompanying ison. Its function is to help the chanters as an ‘aide memoir’ to recall the scale or melodic formulas that are characteristic of the MODE of the hymn which is about to be sung. The apichima is given before the beginning of the chant to be sung. It also provides the beginning pitch for the first note of the hymn to be sung.

*(Printed Page TD-29)*

=== LEAF p1024 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Apocrypha – Apodipnon – Apodosis – Apokrisis – Apolysis – Apolytikion Part 1) (p. 1009 / TD-30)]

TD-30

APOCRYPHA: In modern usage the Apocrypha refers to ancient Jewish books that are not part of the Hebrew Bible but are considered canonical in Eastern Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism. Among the various books included are Tobit, Judith, Baruch, and the Maccabees as well as Ecclesiasticus and the Wisdom of Solomon. Protestant churches follow Jewish tradition in judging these works apocryphal or noncanonical. The term deuterocanonical is used to refer to works accepted in one canon but not all. Pseudepigrapha are spurious works for which biblical authorship is claimed.

APODIPNON (ἀπόδειπνον, τό) Slav. Povecheriye. Prayer after supper. See COMPLINE.

*APODOSIS (ἀπόδοσις, ἡ) Slav. Otdanive: See also LEAVE-TAKING.
The last day of the period of METHEORTA, on which the observance of a feast comes to an end. The order of service of the day of the apodosis is fundamentally that of the feast day itself. The Apodosis of a feast day lasts more than one day and usually occurs eight days after the actual feast day. The Apodosis of Easter occurs after forty days, on the eve of the Ascension. (TB and FL).

*APOKRISIS (ἀπόκρισις, ἡ): The section in the Divine Liturgy after the Megalynarion, beginning with the priest’s petition ‘Above all, remember, Lord...’ (᾿Εν πρώτοις, μνήσθητι, Κύριε...) and ending with the hymn ‘One is holy, One is Lord,...’ (Εἷς ῞Αγιος, εἷς Κύριος...) sung by the choir immediately before the Communion Hymn.

*APOLYSIS (᾿Απόλυσις, ἡ) ‘Dismissal Prayer’: The final prayer recited by the priest (or officiating bishop) at the end of all services.

*APOLYTIKION, pl. APOLYTIKIA (᾿Απολυτίκιον, τό, ἀπολυτίκια, τά). See also TROPARION. Lit. ‘Dismissal Hymn (s)’: The principle hymn of a feast day relating in brief outline the life of the saint or the description of the sacred

*(Printed Page TD-30)*

=== LEAF p1025 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Apolytikion Concluded – Aposticha – Apostolikon Part 1) (p. 1010 / TD-31)]

TD-31

event that is being celebrated on that feast day. According to some sources, it has been named the “Dismissal Hymn” because it is chanted also at the end of Vespers, just before the “Dismissal Prayer” (ἀπόλυσις). It is the characteristic hymn of the day or of the feast, and is often referred to by some as ‘the TROPARION of the Day’. It is used in all the offices and in the Liturgy.

*APOLYTIKION FOR (name of saint or event): This title is used in this book to indicate that the Apolytikion at hand is a generic one belonging to several saints of the same kind of life and saintly activity. This distinction is usually stated in the saint’s epithet in the synaxarion such as “martyr,” “confessor,” etc.

Also, it is a dismissal prayer or hymn said or sung at the end of the Liturgy and at other times during Matins and Vespers. The Apolytikion changes for each feast-day of the year and commemorates the subject of the feast. For instance, the Apolytikion of Christmas is: “Your Nativity, O Christ...” The Apolytikion for the feast of the Annunciation is: “Today is the crowning of our salvation ...Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with you!”

*APOLYTIKION OF (name of saint) (᾿Απολυτίκιον τοῦ (δεῖνος)): This title is used in this book to indicate that the Apolytikion at hand belongs only to the particular saint or event named in this title.

*APOLYTIKION TU NAU: (᾿Απολυτίκιον τοῦ Ναοῦ): See TU NAU. The Dismissal Hymn of the saint or sacred event to which a particular church (naos) has been dedicated and named after.

APOSTICHA (᾿Απόστιχα) Slav. Stixiri na stixovne: These are hymns (STICHIRA) accompanied by verses from the Psalms. They appear together with selected Psalm verses before St. Simeon’s Prayer at Vespers as well as near the end of Daily and Lenten Matins. (From APL).

APOSTOLIKON (᾿Αποστολικόν, τό; pl. ᾿Αποστολικά, τά). A hymn or a group of hymns celebrating and

*(Printed Page TD-31)*

=== LEAF p1026 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Apostolikon Concluded – Apostolos – Archidiakonos – Archieratikon – Archierefs – Archimandrite Part 1) (p. 1011 / TD-32)]

TD-32

singing of the Apostles.

APOSTOLOS (᾿Απόστολος, ὁ) Slav. Apostol: An Orthodox service book containing portions of New Testament scriptures either from the Acts of the Apostles or from the Letters of St. Paul and arranged for use during the Orthodox Ecclesiastical Year. The book may also be referred to as the Epistle Lectionary. The prescribed lections are read as the first scripture reading in the Divine Liturgy and before the Gospel reading. The book usually includes the PROKIMENA and ALLELUIAS sung before and after the prescribed lection.

ARCHIDIAKONOS (᾿Αρχιδιάκονος, ὁ) Slav. Arxidiakon: The Archdeacon or GREAT ARCHDEACON.

ARCHIERATIKON (᾿Αρχιερατικόν, τό) Slav. Chinovnik; Roman. Pontifical. In Greek, the ‘book of the Hierarch’, is the book used by the BISHOP for a Hierarchical Divine Liturgy. It also contains various other services and blessings reserved for the Bishop. It has the same function as the IERATIKON, but is intended only for use by bishops performing the services and contains directions for all the peculiarities of hierarchical services. Besides the order of the Vigil and the liturgies of St. John Chrysostom, St. Basil the Great, and the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, it also contains the ritual order for the ordination or tonsuring to various ecclesiastical ranks, and the order for the consecration of the ANTIMINSION or of a CHURCH.

ARCHIEREFS (᾿Αρχιερεύς, ὁ) Slav. Arxierej or Arxipastyr’: the literal meaning in Greek is ‘Archpriest’. See BISHOP.

ARCHIMANDRITE (᾿Αρχιμανδρίτης, ὁ) Slav. Arximandrit (from Gr. archo, I command, and mandra, a sheepfold): In the Greek Orthodox Rite the Archimandrite is a celibate priest and thus it is from the ranks of archimandrites that bishops are chosen. Also, the superior of a monastery or of a group of monasteries is usually an archimandrite. The term seems to have originated during the fourth century in the far East (Mesopotamia, Persia), and to have spread thence to Egypt and Asia Minor. In the fifth and succeeding centuries it occurs frequently in the writings of the Greek Fathers, also in

*(Printed Page TD-32)*

=== LEAF p1027 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Archimandrite Continued) (p. 1012 / TD-33)]

TD-33

the Acts of Councils, and was even adopted quite extensively in the West where it did not disappear from occasional usage until the ninth century. Originally the archimandrite seems to have been only the superior or abbot of his own monastery; gradually, however, he came to exercise authority over a number of monasteries and by the eleventh century the archimandrites of such monastic centres as Mount Athos, and Mount Olympus in Bithynia, were the equivalent of the Western abbots-general. At present there are in the Greek Orthodox Church two kinds of archimandrites, the original monastic officers exercising jurisdiction in their respective monasteries, as well as honorary archimandrites or well-educated priests attached to chanceries of the great patriarchates (e.g. Constantinople), or at the head of certain branches of temporal administration. It is from the ranks of the archimandrites that bishops are selected. The archimandrite is consecrated by the ecclesiastical authority of a patriarch, a metropolitan, or a bishop, and in some monasteries by election. He has the right to wear a pectoral cross and the EPIGONATION in the celebration of Liturgy, and to sign the cross before his name after the manner of bishops. The monastic archimandrites have also the right to the pastoral staff, and to a pectoral mantle having the four squares of embroidered cloth called “the tables of the law.” Their rights and privileges differ somewhat by tradition or custom in different parts of the Orthodox Church. The usual vestment, common to all, is a black veil worn over the familiar headgear of the Greek clergy and falling down over the back. Archimandrites enjoy the right of precedence among other priests; among themselves this right is regulated by the date of their ordination. Also, an archimandrite ordained by a patriarch outranks archimandrites ordained by hierarchs of lower rank. There is a formal rite for the appointments and creation of these officers, performed with more solemnity in the installment of monastic archimandrites. The office is found not only in all Greek Churches subject to Constantinople, but also in the Russian, Bulgarian, and other autocephalous Churches, that once owed allegiance to that patriarchal see; it exits also among the Catholic (Melchite) Greeks. The office is not known among Armenians, Chaldeans, Syrians, Maronites, Copts, or Abyssinians. An important survival of its use

*(Printed Page TD-33)*

=== LEAF p1028 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Archimandrite Concluded – Artoforion – Artoklasia – Asmatikon – Assumption – Asterisk Part 1) (p. 1013 / TD-34)]

TD-34

in the West is seen in Sicily, where after the time of Roger II (1130-54), the archimandrite of the great Basilian Abbey of San Salvatore in Messina enjoyed extensive, even quasi-episcopal jurisdiction. (Excerpted from the Catholic Encyclopedia.)

ARTOFORION (᾿Αρτοφόριον, τό) Slav. Artofor, Daroxranitelnica, Kovceg or Ark and Kivot or Tabernacle: Also called the Tabernacle. It is located on the back surface of the Altar Table and is used to store the Holy Gifts later to be used in a subsequent Presanctified Liturgy as well as the Holy Gifts previously prepared on each Great (Holy) Thursday and used for conveyance to the sick.

ARTOKLASIA (᾿Αρτοκλασία, ἡ) Slav. Blagoslovenie xlebov: The ceremony of the Blessing of Loaves, or Breaking (Gr. klasis) of Bread (Gr. artos) that takes place before the APOLYTIKION at Vespers when there is an All-night VIGIL. In today’s Greek Orthodox churches, it is celebrated on important feasts even when there is no Vigil, at VESPERS or MATINS or usually after the LITURGY. The ceremony commemorates Christ’s miraculous blessing of the five loaves to feed about five thousand people without provisions who had come to hear Him preach near a sea shore (Mathew 16:13-21; Mark 6:30-44; Luke 9:11-16; and John: 6:1-14.) The ceremony also symbolizes the Lord Himself as the “bread of life” that has descended on mankind from Heaven. The ceremony for such occasions can be found in the bilingual edition of the Divine Liturgy published by the Archdiocese of Thyateira in the United Kingdom. (modified from AE)

*ASMATIKON (ᾀσματικόν): A hymn repeated in a melismatic—that is, more elaborate and ornate—manner: e.g., the Trisagios Hymn at the conclusion of the Doxology, after Dynamis, or in the form of Tu Vimatos in the Divine Liturgy.

*ASSUMPTION See DORMITION.

ASTERISK (᾿Αστερίσκος, ὁ), Slav. Zvezditsa: A sacred cover support having two crossed metal bands fastened in the center so as to form a cross. It is placed on the PATEN and serves to support its covering veil and to prevent the veil from disturbing the particles of the

*(Printed Page TD-34)*

=== LEAF p1029 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Asterisk Concluded – Baldachin – Bastuni – Beatitudes – Beautiful Gate – Belt – Bema – Benedictions Part 1) (p. 1014 / TD-35)]

TD-35

LAMB. The Asterisk (STAR) symbolizes the star that appeared at Christ’s birth.

BALDACHIN: Sometimes written as baldachino or baldaquin, this is a permanent dome-like canopy made of fabric, wood, stone or metal. In some churches, such a structure may be erected over the altar supported by columns. It is often seen also as a canopy over the bishop’s throne.

BASTUNI (μπαστούνι, τό): A plain walking stick usually used by a bishop. See also CHAZRANION.

BEATITUDES (Μακαρισμοί, οἱ): The eight blessings given by Christ at his Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5: 3-12). Also a salutation addressed to an Orthodox Patriarch (“Your Beatitude”). (From FL).

*BEAUTIFUL GATE (῾Ωραῖα Πύλη, ἡ): The gate in the center of the ICONOSTASIS is referred to in the Typikon as the Beautiful Gate through which only members of the clergy may pass. In the liturgical theology of the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Beautiful Gate symbolizes the womb of the Virgin Mary. There may also be present a curtain that is drawn closed at certain times during the services, especially during the preparation of communion during the Divine Liturgy. The doors at either end of the Iconostasis are called Angel Doors because the icons of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel are usually depicted on them; alternatively, they may also be called deacon’s doors because the deacons frequently enter and leave the sanctuary through them. Laymen, when permitted to enter the sanctuary, will use one of the Angel Doors.

BELT (ζώνη, ἡ): See ZONI.

BEMA (βῆμα, τό) Slav. Altar': In an ancient Greek temple this was a raised platform or step. See VIMA.

BENEDICTIONS (Εὐλογητάρια, τά): See also EVLOGITARIA. Benedictions are a series of short hymns introduced

*(Printed Page TD-35)*

=== LEAF p1030 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Benedictions Concluded – Biography – Bishop – Bow – Bright Week Part 1) (p. 1015 / TD-36)]

TD-36

with the refrain “Blessed are you, O Lord, teach me your statutes” («Εὐλογητὸς εἶ, Κύριε, δίδαξόν με τὰ δικαιώματά Σου») This series is located at the end of Psalm 118 (POLYELEOS) and is sung at Matins on Sundays where the hymns are known as Evlogitaria of the Resurrection (εὐλογητάρια ἀναστάσιμα). There is another series which is sung on Saturdays of the Departed and also at Funerals and Memorial Services; these are the Funerial Evlogitaria (Εὐλογητάρια νεκρώσιμα).

BIOGRAPHY: See SYNAXARION and MEGAS SYNAXARISTIS.

BISHOP (᾿Επίσκοπος, ὁ) Lit. Overseer. Today's bishop or HIERARCH is the spiritual leader of a local community of Christians. He ranks above archimandrites, priests and deacons. Only a bishop has the sacramental authority to ordain one to the priesthood. He also administers his diocese. In the New Testament there is no clear distinction between the offices of bishop and elder (presbyter), both of which function as leaders of the community. However, by the mid- to late first century, the Church began to reserve the title of bishop for men of spiritual qualification who were consecrated to follow the Apostles in their office of oversight (see article, “The Four ‘Orders’ in Church Government,” at 1 Tim.; Acts 1:15 26; 14:23; 1 Tim. 3:1-7). (Rev. John W. Morris, Ph.D., Glossary of Orthodox Terminology)

BOW (ὑπόκλισις, ἡ · ὑποκλίνομαι): A bow, or I make a bow.

BRIGHT WEEK: Bright Week is also known as Renewal Week (διακαινήσιμος ἑβδομάς, ἡ): The period is the first week following the celebration of the Resurrection of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ—the Feast of Feasts—celebrated yearly as PASCHA. The period ends with VESPERS of the following Sunday, the Sunday of St. Thomas. The hymnology of this period is highlighted by the use of each Byzantine MODE during the week beginning with Mode I, used predominately on Pascha and continuing each day with a differ-

*(Printed Page TD-36)*
