=== LEAF p691 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Monday of the First Week of the Fast; Order of Matins, Vespers, and Presanctified Liturgy (§§ 18–19 Opening) (p. 676)]

676

ΔΕΥΤΕΡΑ ΤΗΣ Α΄ ΕΒΔΟΜΑΔΟΣ ΤΩΝ ΝΗΣΤΕΙΩΝ

ΔΙΑΤΑΞΙΣ ΤΗΣ ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΙΑΣ ΤΟΥ ΟΡΘΡΟΥ ΚΑΙ ΤΟΥ ΕΣΠΕΡΙΝΟΥ, ΜΕΤΑ ΤΗΣ ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑΣ ΤΩΝ ΠΡΟΗΓΙΑΣΜΕΝΩΝ

18.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ὁ Ἱερεὺς εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Ἅγιον Βῆμα, φορεῖ ἐπιτραχήλιον, καὶ λαβὼν θυμιατόν, ἵσταται ἐνώπιον τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης, θυμιῶν δὲ σταυροειδῶς, λέγει· Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν πάντοτε νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, Ἀμήν· ὁ Ἀναγνώστης τὸ Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, ὁ Ἀναγνώστης Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄ καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Ἱερεὺς Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοουσίῳ . . . καὶ ὁ Προεστὼς λέγει τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον (ἐν πάσῃ σιωπῇ καὶ εὐλαβείᾳ τοῦ λαοῦ ἀκροωμένου) καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τοῦ Ὄρθρου, ὡς ὁρίζεται κατωτέρω.

19.    Τῇ Τρίτῃ καὶ ταῖς λοιπαῖς ἡμέραις τῆς Τεσσαρακοστῆς (ἐξαιρουμένου τοῦ Σαββάτου καὶ τῆς Κυριακῆς), ὁ Ὄρθρος ἄρχεται ὡς ἑξῆς· ὁ Ἱερεὺς Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός . . . Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι . . . τὸ Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν γ΄, τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, καὶ ἀναγινώσκει τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένον ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ· μετὰ τὸ τέλος, εὐθὺς τὰ Κατανυκτικὰ Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, Κύριε, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ δύο Τροπάρια (εἰς τὸ Ὡρολόγιον), εἶτα {Ὁ Ἱερεύς} τὸ Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου, ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων χριστιανῶν . . . ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν . . . ὑπὲρ τοῦ διαφυλαχθῆναι . . . ἐπάκουσον ἡμῶν κτλ. Ἐλεήμων γὰρ καὶ φιλάνθρωπος Θεὸς ὑπάρχεις καὶ σοὶ τὴν δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν, τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ τῷ Ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι . . . καὶ ἡ μικρὰ Ἀπόλυσις· Εὐξώμεθα ὑπὲρ εἰρήνης τοῦ κόσμου κτλ. καὶ τὸ Δι᾿ εὐχῶν. Εἶτα εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Ἱερὸν καὶ ποιεῖ Εὐλογητόν, ὁ Ἀναγνώστης τὸ

*(Printed Page 676)*

=== LEAF p692 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Monday of the First Week of the Fast; Order of Matins, Vespers, and Presanctified Liturgy (§§ 18–19 Opening) (p. 677)]

677

MONDAY OF THE FIRST WEEK OF THE FAST [LENT]

ORDER OF SERVICES FOR MATINS AND VESPERS, WITH THE LITURGY OF THE PRESANCTIFIED

18.    On Monday of the First Week at Matins, the Priest enters the Holy Vima [Sanctuary], puts on the Stole [Epitrachilion] and taking the censer stands before the Holy Altar [Table] and censing with a cross-wise motion says “Blessed is our God always, now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.”
    The Reader reads the Trisagion. The Priest: “For Yours is {the Kingdom}.” The Reader: “Lord, have mercy” (12 times). And immediately the Priest: “Glory to the Holy and Consubstantial.” The Proestos {president or leader of the community} reads the Exapsalmos (the congregation listening in silence and reverence) then the rest of Matins follows as outlined below.
19.    On Tuesday and the rest of the days of Lent (except Saturdays and Sundays), Matins begins as follows. Priest: “Blessed is our God”; “Glory to You our God, glory to You,” “Heavenly King, {the Comforter,}” [Reader:] Trisagion. [Priest:] “For Yours is the Kingdom.” [Reader:] “Lord, have mercy (12 times). Glory, Now and ever; “Come let us worship” (3 times); and Psalm 50. The rest of the Midnight Service is read as directed in the Orologion. Immediately at the conclusion, the penitential hymns “Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy on us,” and the remaining two hymns {from the Orologion}. Then {the Priest}: “Have mercy upon us, O God; according to Your great mercy,” “Again we pray for all pious and Orthodox Christians,” “For our Archbishop (name),” “For the preservation...,” “Again we pray that the Lord God hear our supplications etc.,” “For You are a merciful God and loves mankind, and unto You we ascribe glory to the Father and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit...” And the Small Dismissal follows; “Let us pray for the peace of the world,” etc. and the “Through the prayers.” Then the Priest enters the

*(Printed Page 677)*

=== LEAF p693 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Weekday Matins Order Continued (§ 19 Continued) (p. 678)]

678

Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, ὁ Ἀναγνώστης τὰ γ΄ Τροπάρια Σῶσον Κύριε τὸν λαόν Σου, [Δόξα] Ὁ ὑψωθείς, [Καὶ νῦν] Προστασία φοβερά, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου . . . ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων χριστιανῶν . . . ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν . . . Ὅτι ἐλεήμων καὶ φιλάνθρωπος . . . ὁ Ἀναγνώστης Ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου . . . ὁ Ἱερεὺς Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ . . . καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος (τὰ ἑπόμενα εἰσι κοινὰ καὶ διὰ τὴν Δευτέραν)

    Μετὰ τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον, ἡ Μ. Συναπτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα εἰς τὸν τυχόντα ἦχον τετράκις ἀνὰ τρὶς μετὰ τῶν Στίχων· Ἐκ νυκτὸς ὀρθρίζει τὸ πνεῦμά μου κτλ. καὶ τὰ κατ᾿ ἦχον Τριαδικὰ Τροπάρια (ὅρα ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Τριῳδίου ἢ τοῦ Ὡρολογίου)⁶. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦνται τὰ ὡρισμένα Καθίσματα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Αἴτησιν, τὰ κατανυκτικὰ Καθίσματα τῆς α΄ Στιχολογίας τοῦ ἤχου (ὅρα ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Τριῳδίου) καὶ τὰ τῆς ἡμέρας τῆς β΄ καὶ γ΄ Στιχολογίας, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, τὸ Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν σου, Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄, [Ὁ Ἱερεύς·] Ἐλέει καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς, καὶ εὐθὺς ἡ Στιχολογία τῶν θ΄ Ὠδῶν.

    Αἱ θ΄ Ὠδαὶ στιχολογοῦνται ὁλόκληροι μὲν ἐκεῖναι τῶν ὁποίων ὑπάρχουσιν ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ Τριῴδια, ἡ ἀρχὴ δὲ μόνον καὶ οἱ τελευταῖοι Στίχοι τῶν λοιπῶν Ὠδῶν· ἀλλ᾿ ἡ η΄ καὶ ἡ θ΄ ἡ τοῦ Ζαχαρίου (διότι ἡ τῆς Θεοτόκου θ΄ στιχολογεῖται εἰς Τὴν τιμιωτέραν πάντοτε) στιχολογοῦνται ὁλόκληροι καθ᾿ ἑκάστην· οὕτω λοιπὸν τὴν Δευτέραν στιχολογεῖται ὁλόκληρος ἡ α΄ Ὠδὴ Ἄσωμεν τῷ Κυρίῳ, εἶτα ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ οἱ δύο τελευταῖοι Στίχοι μετὰ τοῦ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς γ΄, δ΄, ε΄, ς΄, καὶ ζ΄ Ὠδῆς καὶ ἀκολούθως ἡ η΄ ὁλόκληρος καὶ ἐκ τῆς θ΄ ἡ τοῦ Ζαχαρίου. Τὴν Τρίτην, ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ οἱ δύο τελευταῖοι Στίχοι τῆς α΄ Ὠδῆς μετὰ τοῦ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, ὁλόκληρος ἡ β΄ Πρόσεχε

6. Εἰς τὸ τέλος ἑκάστου πρώτου Τριαδικοῦ γίνεται μνεία τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας, δευτέρου δὲ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τρίτου τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὡς σημειοῦται καὶ περαιτέρω εἰς τὸ Φωταγωγικόν (ὅρα ὑποσημ. 10).

*(Printed Page 678)*

=== LEAF p694 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Weekday Matins Order Continued (§ 19 Continued) (p. 679)]

679

Sanctuary and says “Blessed is our God.” The Reader: the Trisagion. The Priest: “For Yours is.” The Reader: the following three hymns: “O Lord, save [Your people],” {Glory;} “You, who of Your own free will was elevated upon the cross”; {Now and ever,} “Awesome [and unfading] protection.” The Priest: “Have mercy upon us, O God, according to Your great mercy...,” “Again, let us pray for pious and Orthodox Christians...,” “For our Archbishop...,” “For You are a merciful God and loves mankind....” Reader: “In the name of the Lord...” Priest: “Glory to the Holy and [Consubstantial]...” And the Exapsalmos is read. (The rest of Tuesday’s rubrics below apply to Monday as well.)
    After the Exapsalmos, the Great Litany and then “Alleluia” in the Mode of the week is sung three times after each of the four verses: “My soul yearns for You in the night...” etc.; the Triadic Hymns of the Mode (See the back of the Triodion or the Orologion).⁶ Then the {first section of the} designated Kathismata of the Psalter are sung; and after the [Small] Litany we sing the Penitential Kathismata of the Mode of the First Stichologia [Section] (see the end of the Triodion); then the second and third sections of the designated Kathismata of the day [interspersed with the relevant Kathismata of the Triodion as above, i.e. Second Section Kathisma, Kathisma of the Triodion; third section Kathisma, Kathisma of the Triodion]. Then Psalm 50; then “O God save Your people {and bless Your inheritance.}” The Reader: “Lord have mercy” (12 times). [The Priest:] “By the mercy and compassion.” And immediately following, the recitation of the nine Odes takes place {in the following manner}.
    Of the nine Biblical Odes, only those that have numbers corresponding to Odes in the Triodion are sung in their entirety; and only the first and last verses of those Biblical Odes not having a correspondingly numbered Ode in the Triodion are sung. The exceptions are the Eighth Ode (of the three children in the fire) and the Ninth Ode (of Zacharias), since the Ninth Ode of the Theotokos is always sung at the “More honorable”; these are also sung in their entirety. Thus on Monday, the entire First Ode “I will sing to the Lord” is sung; then the beginning and the last two verses with Glory, Now and ever of the Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Odes; the entire Eighth and that of Zacharias from the Ninth. On Tuesday, the beginning and the last two verses with Glory and Now and ever of the First Ode; the entire Second Ode “Give ear, O heavens”; the beginning and last

6. At the end of every first Triadic Hymn, mention is made of the Saint of the day; at the end of each second Triadic Hymn, the Saint of the Church; and at the end of each third Triadic Hymn, the Theotokos, as noted below in the Prayer of Light [Photagogikon]. (See note 10.)

*(Printed Page 679)*

=== LEAF p695 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Biblical Odes Distribution and Canons Order (§ 19 Continued) (p. 680)]

680

οὐρανέ, ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ οἱ δύο τελευταῖοι Στίχοι μετὰ τοῦ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς γ΄, δ΄, ε΄, ς΄ καὶ ζ΄ καὶ αἱ Ὠδαὶ η΄ καὶ θ΄ ὡς προεσημειώθη.
    Τὴν Τετάρτην, ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ οἱ δύο τελευταῖοι Στίχοι μετὰ τοῦ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς α΄ Ὠδῆς, ὁλόκληρος ἡ γ΄ Ἐστερεώθη ἡ καρδία μου, ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ οἱ δύο τελευταῖοι Στίχοι μετὰ τοῦ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς δ΄, ε΄, ς΄ καὶ ζ΄ καὶ ὁλόκληροι αἱ Ὠδαὶ η΄ καὶ θ΄. Τὴν Πέμπτην, ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ οἱ δύο τελευταῖοι Στίχοι μετὰ τοῦ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς α΄ καὶ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, ὁλόκληρος ἡ δ΄ Κύριε εἰσακήκοα, ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ οἱ δύο τελευταῖοι Στίχοι μετὰ τοῦ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς ε΄, ς΄ καὶ ζ΄ καὶ ὁλόκληροι αἱ Ὠδαὶ η΄ καὶ θ΄. Τὴν Παρασκευήν, ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ οἱ δύο τελευταῖοι Στίχοι τῆς α΄, γ΄ καὶ δ΄ Ὠδῆς, ὁλόκληρος ἡ ε΄ Ἐκ νυκτὸς ὀρθρίζει τὸ πνεῦμά μου, καὶ ὁλόκληροι ὡσαύτως αἱ Ὠδαὶ ς΄ καὶ ζ΄ (διὰ τὴν Τυρινὴν Παρασκευὴν μόνον), διὰ δὲ τὰς ἄλλας Παρασκευὰς ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ τὸ τέλος καὶ τῆς ς΄ καὶ τῆς ζ΄ Ὠδῆς ὁλόκληροι δὲ διὰ πᾶσαν ἀνεξαιρέτως Παρασκευὴν ἡ η΄ καὶ θ΄.

    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἀρχὴν ἑκάστης Ὠδῆς ἐννοοῦμεν τὸν ἐν κεφαλίδι ἑκάστης γεγραμμένον Στίχον, ὡς π.χ. εἰς τὴν α΄ Ὠδὴν Τῷ Κυρίῳ ᾄσωμεν, ἐνδόξως γὰρ δεδόξασται· εἰς τὴν γ΄ Ἅγιος εἶ Κύριε καὶ σὲ ὑμνεῖ τὸ πνεῦμά μου· εἰς τὴν δ΄ Δόξα τῇ δυνάμει σου Κύριε, καὶ εἰς τὰς ἐπιλοίπους Ὠδὰς ὡσαύτως.

    Περὶ τῶν Κανόνων σημειοῦμεν ὅτι τὴν μὲν ἑβδομάδα τῆς Τυρινῆς (ὅτε ἄρχονται τὰ Τριῴδια) ἀναγινώσκονται πρὸ τούτων καὶ οἱ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου⁷ καὶ οἱ τοῦ Μηναίου Κανόνες. Τὰς δὲ τῆς Μεγάλης Τεσσαρακοστῆς ἑβδομάδας καταλιμπάνονται συνήθως οἱ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου, ἀναγινώσκονται δὲ κατὰ τὴν ἑξῆς τάξιν· Τὴν Δευτέραν μετὰ τὴν α΄ Ὠδὴν τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Μηναίου ἕπονται τὰ Τριῴδια τῆς α΄ Ὠδῆς μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι⁸, εἶτα ἡ γ΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Μηναίου, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου α΄ Ὠδῆς, Αἴτησις, καὶ τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Μηναίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου, κατόπιν

7. Τῆς Ὀκτωήχου λέγονται καὶ οἱ δύο Κανόνες, ἐν αἷς Ὠδαῖς λείπουσι Τριῴδια, ἐν αἷς δὲ Ὠδαῖς εἰσί, καταλιμπάνεται ὁ β΄. Ἀλλ᾿ ἐὰν ᾖ δίειρμον τὸ Τριῴδιον, ὡς τὴν Τετάρτην καὶ τὴν Παρασκευὴν καταλιμπάνονται καὶ αἱ δύο Ὠδαὶ τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ὀκτωήχου, ὡς καὶ τοῦ Μηναίου.
8. Κυρίως οὐδεὶς Στίχος λεκτέος εἰς τὰ Τριῴδια, διότι προηγοῦνται αἱ Ὠδαί, αἵτινες περιέχουσι τοὺς ἀνήκοντας Στίχους· μόνον εἰς τὰ Τροπάρια τῆς β΄ Ὠδῆς, ὡς σημειοῖ καὶ τὸ Ὡρολόγιον πρὸ ταύτης, λέγεται Στίχος τὸ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, Δόξα σοι, διότι τὸ Πρόσεχε Οὐρανὲ δὲν περιλαμβάνει Στίχους· ἀλλ᾿ οἱ Ἱερεῖς συνηθίσαντες ἄνευ ἀποχρῶντος λόγου ἵνα προτάττωσι Στίχους καὶ εἰς τὰ Τριῴδια, λέγουσι πάντοτε τὸ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι.

*(Printed Page 680)*

=== LEAF p696 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Biblical Odes Distribution and Canons Order (§ 19 Continued) (p. 681)]

681

two verses with Glory, Now and ever of the Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Odes; and the Eighth and Ninth Odes as forementioned.
    On Wednesday, the beginning and the last two verses with Glory, Now and ever of the First Ode; the entire Third Ode: “My heart exalts in the Lord”; the beginning and the last two verses with Glory, Now and ever of the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Odes; the entire Eighth and Ninth Odes. On Thursday, the beginning and the last two verses with Glory, Now and ever of the First and Third Odes; the entire Fourth Ode “O Lord, I have heard”; the beginning and the last two verses with Glory, Now and ever of the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Odes; the entire Eighth and Ninth Odes. On Friday, the beginning and the last two verses with Glory, Now and ever of the First, Third, and Fourth Odes; the entire Fifth Ode “My soul yearns for You in the night”; also the Sixth and Seventh Odes in their entirety (for Cheesefare Friday only); for the other Fridays, the beginning and the end of the Sixth and Seventh Odes; the Eighth and Ninth Odes in their entirety on Friday without any exception.
    Note well that by the beginning of each Ode we mean the verse written first; i.e., in the First Ode: “Let us sing to the Lord, for He has triumphed gloriously”; in the Third “You are holy, O Lord, and my spirit praises You”; in the Fourth “Glory to Your power, O Lord”; and in the rest of the Odes likewise.
    Concerning the Canons: we note that during Cheesefare week (when the Triodia Canons begin) the Canons of the Oktoichos and Mineon are read before them.⁷ Though during the weeks of Great Lent, the Canons of the Oktoichos are customarily omitted, they are prescribed to be read according to this order: On Monday, after the First Ode of the Canon of the Mineon, are said the Triodia of the First Ode with the Verse “Glory to You our God, glory to You,”⁸ then the Third Ode of the Mineon, the Irmos of the First Ode of the Triodion, the [Small] Synapti, the Kathisma of the Mineon with its Theotokion; after this, the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Odes of

7. Both Canons of the Oktoichos are said. If, however, there is an ode in the Triodion Canon, then the Second Canon is omitted. But if the Triodion has two Irmi (e.g. two Canons) as on Wednesday and Friday, then the two Canons of the Oktoichos as well as that of the Mineon are omitted.
8. Properly, the Triodia should not have any verse, since the Odes which contain the corresponding verses precede them. Only the hymns of the Second Ode have the Verse “Glory to You, Our God, glory to You” (as the Orologion also notes) because “Listen O Heaven...” does not contain verses; but priests having become accustomed without sufficient reason to put verses in front of the Triodia, always say “Glory to You, Our God, glory to You.”

*(Printed Page 681)*

=== LEAF p697 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Canons Order Continued, Photagogika, and Aposticha (§ 19 Continued) (p. 682)]

682

ἡ δ΄, ε΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Μηναίου, καὶ μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν ἡ Αἴτησις, τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου (εἰ ἔχει), εἰ δὲ μή, τὸ μετὰ τὰ Καθίσματα Μαρτυρικὸν τοῦ ἤχου⁹ (ὅρα εἰς τὸ τέλος τοῦ Τριῳδίου), καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας, εἶτα ἡ ζ΄ καὶ η΄ τοῦ Μηναίου καὶ τὰ Τριῴδια τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου, ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Μηναίου καὶ τὰ Τριῴδια τῆς αὐτῆς Ὠδῆς, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ τοῦ Τριῳδίου μετὰ τοῦ Αἰνοῦμεν, εὐλογοῦμεν, καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Τὴν Τρίτην ἡ α΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Μηναίου, εἶτα ἡ β΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, ἡ γ΄ τοῦ Μηναίου, καὶ ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς β΄ Ὠδῆς, ἡ Αἴτησις, τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Μηναίου, ἡ δ΄, ε΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Μηναίου, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τοῦ Μηναίου, ἡ Αἴτησις, τὸ Μαρτυρικόν, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, εἶτα ἡ ζ΄ Ὠδὴ καὶ ἡ η΄ τοῦ Μηναίου, καὶ τὰ Τριῴδια τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς, ἐν τέλει ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Μηναίου, καὶ τὰ Τριῴδια. Μετὰ τῆς αὐτῆς ἀναλογίας ἀναγινώσκονται οἱ Κανόνες Μηναίου καὶ Τριῳδίου καὶ εἰς τὰς λοιπὰς ἡμέρας τῆς ἑβδομάδος μέχρι τῆς Παρασκευῆς καὶ καθ᾿ ὅλην τὴν Τεσσαρακοστὴν ἐκτὸς τοῦ Σαββάτου καὶ τῆς Κυριακῆς. Σημειοῦμεν ὅμως πρὸς πλείονα ἀκρίβειαν ὅτι τὴν Τετάρτην καὶ τὴν Παρασκευὴν τῆς Τυρινῆς, ἐπειδὴ ἔχει τὸ Τριῴδιον εἰς πάσας τὰς Ὠδὰς Κανόνας, τηρεῖται ἡ διάταξις ἡ πρὸ τῶν κανόνων τούτων ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ τῆς ἡμέρας σημειουμένη, καὶ ὅτι Εἱρμὸν τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς λέγομεν τὸν τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ οὐχὶ τὸν τοῦ Μηναίου. Ἀπ᾿ θ΄ ψάλλομεν τὸ Αἰνοῦμεν, εὐλογοῦμεν, καὶ τὸν Εἱρμὸν τοῦ δευτέρου Κανόνος τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς θ΄ τοῦ δευτέρου Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, καὶ μετ᾿ αὐτὸν τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν ὡς ἀληθῶς, ἡ Αἴτησις καὶ ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Ὅτι σὲ αἰνοῦσι, τὸ Φωταγωγικὸν τοῦ ἤχου ἐκ γ΄ ¹⁰ καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Σοὶ Δόξα πρέπει· εἶτα ἡ Ἐκτενής, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Σὸν γάρ ἐστι, ψάλλεται τὸ

9. Ἐὰν ὁ Ἅγιος τῆς ἡμέρας ἔχῃ Κοντάκιον, λέγεται τοῦτο μετὰ τὴν Αἴτησιν τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ δὲ Μαρτυρικὸν συνάπτεται μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν Καθισμάτων, ὡς σημειοῖ καὶ ἡ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ τυπικὴ διάταξις.
10. Ἰστέον ὅτι τὴν συμπλήρωσιν ἑκάστου Φωταγωγικοῦ ποιοῦμεν οὕτω. Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ εἰς τὸ α΄ Προστασίαις τῶν Ἀσωμάτων καὶ σῶσόν με· εἰς τὸ β΄ λέγομεν πάντοτε Πρεσβείαις τοῦ Ἁγίου (τοῦ Ναοῦ), καὶ εἰς τὸ γ΄ ἐπίσης καθ᾿ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν Πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ σῶσόν με· τῇ Τρίτῃ Πρεσβείαις τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ σῶσον με· τῇ Τετάρτῃ καὶ τῇ Παρασκευῇ Δυνάμει τοῦ Σταυροῦ σου καὶ σῶσόν με· τῇ Πέμπτῃ Πρεσβείαις τῶν Ἀποστόλων καὶ σῶσόν με· τῷ Σαββάτῳ λέγομεν ἀντὶ Φωταγωγικοῦ τὰ Νεκρώσιμα Ἐξαποστειλάρια Ὁ καὶ νεκρῶν καὶ ζώντων καὶ Ἡμεῖς ἐν σοὶ καυχώμεθα· ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὴν ἀκριβεστέραν τάξιν λέγεται καὶ τὸ Σάββατον τὸ Φωταγωγικὸν τοῦ ἤχου δίς, καὶ εἰς μὲν τὸ α΄ Πρεσβείαις τῶν Ἁγίων σου καὶ σῶσόν με· εἰς δὲ τὸ β΄ Πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ σῶσόν με· τελευταῖον δὲ λέγεται τὸ Ὁ καὶ νεκρῶν καὶ ζώντων.

*(Printed Page 682)*

=== LEAF p698 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Canons Order Continued, Photagogika, and Aposticha (§ 19 Continued) (p. 683)]

683

the Mineon and, after the Irmos, the {Small} Synapti, the Kontakion of the Saint (if he has one), if not, the Martyrikon of the Mode that comes after the Kathismata⁹ (look for these in the back of the Triodion), and the Minologion of the day; then the Seventh and Eighth Odes of the Mineon and the Triodia of the Eighth Ode of the Triodion, the Ninth Ode of the Mineon and the Triodia of the [Ninth] Ode, the Irmos of the Eighth Ode of the {Second Canon of the} Triodion with the “We praise, we bless” then we sing by verse the “More honorable.” On Tuesday, the First Ode of the Mineon, then the Second Ode of the Triodion and the Third Ode of the Mineon and the Irmos of the Second Ode, the {Small} Synapti, the Kathismata of the Mineon, the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Odes of the Mineon, the Irmos [of the Fifth Ode] of the Mineon, the {Small} Synapti, the Martyrikon (if there is no Kontakion) and the Minologion; then the Seventh and Eighth Odes of the Mineon and the Triodia {of the Eighth Ode,} at the end the Ninth Ode of the Mineon and the Triodia. There is an analogous pattern for the reading of the Canons of the Mineon and the Triodion for the rest of the week until Friday, and for all of Lent except Saturday and Sunday. For greater accuracy, however, we note that on Wednesday and Friday of Cheesefare week, because the Triodion has a Canon for every Ode, the rubrics prescribed before the Canon in the Triodion are followed; the Irmos of the Sixth Ode of the Triodion is sung and not that of the Mineon. At the Ninth Ode we sing “We praise, we bless” and the Irmos of the Second Canon of the Eighth Ode of the Triodion; then we sing by verse “More honorable,” the Irmos of the Ninth Ode of the Second Canon of the Triodion and after that “It is truly meet,” the Petition and the Exclamation “For You {do all the Powers of heaven} praise.” Then the Photagogikon of the Mode (3 times)¹⁰ and immediately {the Small Doxology} “To You belongs glory,” the Litany

9. If the Saint of the day has a Kontakion, this is said after the petition of the Sixth Ode; the Martyrikon is said after the rest of the Kathismata as the rubrics of the Triodion note.
10. It must be borne in mind that the ending of each Photagogikon is as follows: Monday at the first Photagogikon “Through the intercessions of the Bodiless Powers, and save me.” At the second Photagogikon we say always: “Through the intercessions of your Saint (of the Church) and save me.” And at the third Photagogikon, also daily: “Through the intercessions of the Mother of God, and save me.” On Tuesday: “Through the intercessions of the Forerunner, and save me.” On Wednesday and Friday: “By the power of Your Cross, and save me.” On Thursday: Through the intercessions of the Apostles, and save me.” On Saturday, instead of the Photagogikon, we say the Exapostilarion of the departed “You Who, being God...” and “We boast of you {O Mother of God}.” But according to exact rubric, on Saturday, the Photagogikon of the Mode is sung twice; at its first singing “Through the intercessions of the Mother of God, and save me.”; then at its second singing “You, Who being God....”

*(Printed Page 683)*

=== LEAF p699 ===
[Original Greek Text: Triodion: Aposticha Concl., Hours, Typika, and Prostrations (§ 19 Concluded) (p. 684)]

684

Ἰδιόμελον τῶν Ἀποστίχων τοῦ Ὄρθρου δίς, οὗ ὁ α΄ Στίχος· Ἐνεπλήσθημεν τὸ πρωῒ τὸ ἔλεός σου Κύριε καὶ ὁ β΄ Καὶ ἔστω ἡ λαμπρότης Κυρίου τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡμῶν ἐφ᾿ ἡμᾶς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτοκίον (ἢ Σταυροθεοτοκίον τῇ Τετάρτῃ καὶ τῇ Παρασκευῇ), τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐν τῷ Ναῷ ἑστῶτες τῆς δόξης σου, τὸ Κύριε, ἐλέησον μ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβίμ, Ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου . . . ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὁ ὢν εὐλογητός, τὸ Ἐπουράνιε Βασιλεῦ, τὰς γ΄ μεγάλας μετανοίας, καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν, καὶ ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι ὡς εἰσι διατεταγμέναι ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ (ὅρα τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος, σελ. 69) καὶ τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ. Εἰς τὴν Θ΄ Ὥραν, μετὰ τὰ Κοντάκια Βλέπων ὁ λῃστὴς κτλ. τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβίμ, Ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Δι᾿ εὐχῶν καὶ τὰς γ΄ μεγάλας μετανοίας καὶ εὐθὺς οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ Ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ σου μνήσθητι ἡμῶν Κύριε, οἵτινες ψάλλονται ὑπὸ τῶν δύο Χορῶν, τὰ Τροπάρια Χορὸς ὁ ἐπουράνιος, τὸ Πιστεύω εἰς ἕνα Θεόν, τὸ Ἄνες ἄφες, τὸ Πάτερ ἡμῶν, καὶ τὰ Κοντάκια Ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους μετεμορφώθης καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἡμέρας¹¹, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν τοῦ ἤχου (ὅρα ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Μαρτυρικὸν τῆς ζ΄ Ὠδῆς), Δόξα, Μετὰ τῶν Ἁγίων ἀνάπαυσον, Καὶ νῦν, Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν, τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Ὁ ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ, Κύριε ἐλέησον γ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβίμ, Ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου, Ὁ Θεὸς οἰκτιρήσαι ἡμᾶς, τὰς γ΄ μεγάλας μετανοίας, καὶ ὁ Προεστὼς εὐθὺς τὸν Προοιμιακόν, καὶ ἄρχεται οὕτως.

11. Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ Ἀρχιστράτηγοι Θεοῦ, τῇ Τρίτῃ Προφῆτα Θεοῦ καὶ Πρόδρομε τῆς Χάριτος, τῇ Τετάρτῃ καὶ τῇ Παρασκευῇ Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ, τῇ Πέμπτῃ Τοὺς ἀσφαλεῖς καὶ θεοφθόγγους κήρυκας καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου Νικολάου Ἐν τοῖς Μύροις, Ἅγιε.

*(Printed Page 684)*

=== LEAF p700 ===
[English Facing Translation: Triodion: Aposticha Concl., Hours, Typika, and Prostrations (§ 19 Concluded) (p. 685)]

685

[Ektenis] and after the Exclamation “For Yours it is {to show mercy and to save us, O our God,}” then is sung the Idiomelon of the Aposticha of Matins (2 times), the Verse of the first being “In the morning fill us with Your mercy, Lord”; the Verse of the second being “Let the bright splendor of the Lord our God be upon us”; and the Martyrikon (once). Glory, Now and ever and the Theotokion (or Stavrotheotokion on Wednesday and Friday) then “It is just to confess the Lord {and to glorify His Name,}” the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “As we stand within the nave of Your glory,” “Lord, have mercy” (40 times), Glory, Now and ever, “More honorable than the Cherubim,” “In the name of the Lord, {bless Father.}” The Priest: “Blessed are You, {O Christ our God, at all times, now and ever and from all ages to all ages.} “Heavenly King {give strength to our public servants,}” three great prostrations and immediately “O come let us worship,” and the Hours are read as prescribed in the Triodion (see Monday of the First Week) and the Orologion. At the Ninth Hour after the Kontakia “When the thief” etc. “Lord, have mercy” (40 times), Glory, Now and ever, “More honorable than the Cherubim,” “In the name of the Lord, {bless Father.}” Then the Priest: “Through the prayers {of our Holy Fathers}” and three great prostrations. Immediately, the Beatitudes [Makarizmi] “In Your Kingdom, remember us, O Lord” which are sung by the two choirs. The hymns beginning with “The heavenly choir” are sung, the “I believe in one God {the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed}, the “Loose, remit,” the “Our Father” {Lord’s Prayer}, and the Kontakion “On the mountain You were transfigured,” the Kontakion of the day,¹¹ and the Kontakion of the Saint of the Church, the Martyrikon of the Mode (see the end of the Triodion, Martyrikon of the Seventh Ode), Glory, “With the souls of Your servants lay to rest;” Now and ever, “O protection of Christians,” “Lord, have mercy” (40 times), then “You Who in all times and places {are worshipped and glorified,}” Lord, have mercy” (3 times), Glory, Now and ever, “More honorable than the Cherubim,” “In the name of the Lord, {bless Father.}” Then the Priest: “May God be merciful unto us {and bless us; may He cause His countenance to shine upon us, and have mercy on us.}” The three great prostrations and the Proestos (leader of the community) immediately reads the Introductory Psalm (Ps. 103) and Vespers begin.

11. Monday: “O Arch-generals of God’s armies”; Tuesday: “O Prophet of God and Forerunner of grace”; Wednesday and Friday: “O Christ our God, Who chose of Your own free will to be raised upon the Cross”; Thursday: “O Lord, You have taken up to You two infallible and God-voiced preachers” and that of St. Nicholas “In Myra, O Saint, {you proved yourself to be a priest....}”

*(Printed Page 685)*
