=== LEAF p261 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — December 9: Conception of St. Anna Concl. / Sunday of the Holy Forefathers (p. 246)]

246

Ἁγίας Ἀπόθεσθε Ἀδὰμ, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινὸν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ἁγίας. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς Ἁγίας, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἑορτάζει σήμερον ἡ Οἰκουμένη (ζήτει ἀφ’ ς΄ Ὠδῆς). Ἀπόστολος τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Κυριακὴ τῶν ἁγίων Προπατόρων.

Σημείωσις. Τῇ ἀπὸ τῆς ΙΑ΄ τοῦ ἐνεστῶτος μέχρι τῆς ΙΖ΄ τυχούσῃ Κυριακῇ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν ἁγίων Προπατόρων ὡς ἐφεξῆς·
1.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῶν Προπατόρων δ΄, Δόξα Τοὺς πρὸ τοῦ νόμου Πατέρας, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα Τῶν Προπατόρων τὸ σύστημα, Καὶ νῦν Ἀσπόρως ἐκ θείου Πνεύματος, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ Ἐν πίστει τοὺς Προπάτορας ἐδικαίωσας καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ τῶν Ἁγίων ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων Πατράσιν αἶνον προσάξωμεν· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Εἰς δρόσον τοῖς παισὶ, καὶ τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Προπατόρων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Προπατόρων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Προπατόρων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῶν Προπατόρων δ΄ τὴν τῶν σεπτῶν. Δόξα Δεῦτε ἅπαντες, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.

*(Printed Page 246)*

=== LEAF p262 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — December 9: Conception of St. Anna Concl. / Sunday of the Holy Forefathers (p. 247)]

247

blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "Today the universe celebrates" (look after the 6th Ode). The Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Sunday. Communion Hymn "Praise the Lord," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

Sunday of the Holy Forefathers [Ancestors of Christ.]

Note: On the Sunday between December 11 and 17, the Service of the Holy Forefathers is sung as follows:
1.    In Vespers, on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Forefathers, Glory "O faithful, let us sing a hymn of praise to all the Ancestors who preceded the Law," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "The system of the Forefathers" Now and ever "You have conceived by the Holy Spirit." The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Forefathers "Through faith, You have justified your Ancestors," and Dismissal.
2.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50 the Triadic Canon and the Triadic "It is meet"; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saints and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion twice and that of the Saint once, the Psalter of the day and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saints "To the Fathers let us bring praises." After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi "In dew the Children" and the Resurrection Kontakion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forefathers, the Minologion of the Saints of the day and the Postscript of the Sunday of the Forefathers. The Katavasia "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Forefathers and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Forefathers, "Let us all celebrate," Glory, "Come. let us all celebrate," Now and ever "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

*(Printed Page 247)*

=== LEAF p263 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday of the Holy Forefathers Concl. / December 12: St. Spyridon the Wonderworker (p. 248)]

248

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Προπατόρων δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Προπατόρων καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος Ὅταν ὁ Χριστὸς φανερωθῇ ἡ ζωὴ ἡμῶν (ζήτει Κυριακ. ΚΘ΄) καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἄνθρωπός τις ἐποίησε δεῖπνον μέγαν. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙΒ΄.    Τοῦ ἐν ἁγίοις Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Σπυρίδωνος τοῦ Θαυματουργοῦ.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Προπατόρων, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῶν Προπατόρων γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄, Δόξα Τοὺς πρὸ τοῦ νόμου Πατέρας, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον [Καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα· τὸ Τυπικὸν δὲν ἀναφέρει Ἀναγνώσματα, ἀλλὰ τὸ Μηναῖον συνιστᾷ, ὅτι, ἐὰν ἐπιθυμοῦνται τοιαῦτα, νὰ λέγωνται τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ς΄ Δεκεμβρίου]. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἱεραρχῶν τὸ θεῖον κειμήλιον, Καὶ νῦν Τῶν Προπατόρων τὸ σύστημα, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῶν Προπατόρων Ἐν πίστει τοὺς Προπάτορας καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐν πίστει τοὺς Προπάτορας καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῶν Προπατόρων. Εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ Καθίσματα τῆς Ὀκτωήχου κατὰ σειρὰν καὶ ἡ γ΄ Στιχολογία τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τῶν Προπατόρων καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Εἰς δρόσον τοῖς παισὶ καὶ τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Προπατόρων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας, εἶτα τῶν Προπατόρων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν,

*(Printed Page 248)*

=== LEAF p264 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday of the Holy Forefathers Concl. / December 12: St. Spyridon the Wonderworker (p. 249)]

249

3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Forefathers. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Forefathers, that of the Saint of the Church, Kontakion "Today the Virgin." Apostolos "When Christ our life appeared" (29th Sunday) and Gospel "A certain man gave a dinner." At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise" "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 12th.    Our Father among the Saints, Spyridon the Wonderworker.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order in the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on the Sunday of the Forefathers, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 3 of the Forefathers and 3 of the Saint. Glory, "To all the Ancestors who preceded the Law," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon. {And the Readings: there is no mention of the Readings in the Typikon; however, the Mineon indicates that, if Readings are desired, those of December 6 should be read}. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint "The divine heirloom of Hierarchs," Now and ever, "The system of the Forefathers." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, of the Forefathers "Through faith, You have justified Your Ancestors," and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Through faith, You have justified Your Ancestors," and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia of the Resurrection, that of the Saint and that of the Forefathers. Then the Psalter of the day and the Amomos. The Kathismata of the Octoichos in order, and the third Stichologia of the Saint, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Forefathers and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi "In dew the Children," Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection (read); after the 6th Ode, Kontakion and Ikos of the Forefathers, the Minologion of the day and of the Sunday of the Forefathers. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the

*(Printed Page 249)*

=== LEAF p265 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 12: St. Spyridon Concl. / December 15: St. Eleutherios / December 17: Prophet Daniel & Three Children / December 20: St. Ignatius & Forefeast (p. 250)]

250

Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Προπατόρων, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τῶν Προπατόρων γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄, Δόξα Δεῦτε ἅπαντες πιστοὶ πανηγυρίσωμεν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Προπατόρων δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Προπατόρων, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Προπατόρων. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙΕ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου ἱερομάρτυρος Ἐλευθερίου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι δὲ τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Προπατόρων, τὴν διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τοῦ Ἁγίου Σπυρίδωνος § 2,3,4.

Τῇ ΙΖ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου προφήτου Δανιὴλ καὶ τῶν ἁγίων τριῶν Παίδων.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη αὐτῶν ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτῶν ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ δὲ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Προπατόρων, ἡ τῶν Ἁγίων Ἀκολουθία καταλιμπάνεται, διότι καὶ οἱ Ἅγιοι οὗτοι κατατάττονται ἐν τῷ Χορῷ τῶν Προπατόρων, ὧν ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ταύτῃ τῇ Κυριακῇ.

Τῇ Κ΄.    Ἡ μνήμη τοῦ ἁγίου ἱερομάρτυρος Ἰγνατίου καὶ Προεόρτια τῶν Γενεθλίων τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ προεόρτιος Ἀκολουθία μετὰ τῆς τοῦ Ἁγίου ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.

*(Printed Page 250)*

=== LEAF p266 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 12: St. Spyridon Concl. / December 15: St. Eleutherios / December 17: Prophet Daniel & Three Children / December 20: St. Ignatius & Forefeast (p. 251)]

251

Forefathers, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 2 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Forefathers, and 3 of the Saint, Glory, "Come, let us all celebrate," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Forefathers. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the the Forefathers, that of the Saint, and that of the Saint of the Church. Kontakion "Today the Virgin." The Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the Sunday of the Forefathers. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 15th.    The Holy Hieromartyr Eleftherios.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order in the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on the Sunday of the Forefathers, see the order for Saint Spyridon, Paragraphs 2, 3, 4.

The 17th.    The Holy Prophet Daniel and the Three Holy Children.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order in the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on the Sunday of the Forefathers, the Service of the Saints is omitted, since these Saints are in the ranks of the Forefathers, whose Service is sung on this Sunday.

The 20th.    The Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr Ignatios the God-bearer and the Pre-feast of the Nativity of our Saviour.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service of the Pre-feast together with that of the Saint is sung according to the order in the Mineon.
2.    If the 20th coincides with the Sunday before Christmas, the Commemoration of the Holy {Hieromartyr Ignatios} is transferred to the

*(Printed Page 251)*

=== LEAF p267 ===
[Original Greek Text: December 20: St. Ignatius Transferred to Dec 19 / Sunday before Nativity: Holy Fathers, Case 1 (p. 252)]

252

2.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου μετατίθεται καὶ προψάλλεται τῷ Σαββάτῳ, ἤτοι τῇ ΙΘ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς οὕτω· Τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, Προσόμοια τοῦ ἁγίου Ἰγνατίου γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ ἁγίου Βονιφατίου. Δόξα Θεοφόρε Ἰγνάτιε, Καὶ νῦν Ὁ Βασιλεὺς τῶν οὐρανῶν. (Αὐτὸς ὁ ὕμνος εἶναι τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ Μ. Ἑσπερινοῦ τοῦ Σαββάτου, ἦχος πλ. Δ΄. Ἐγείρεται τὸ ἐρώτημα διατὶ ἀναφέρεται εἰς τὴν παροῦσαν περίπτωσιν αὐτὸ τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ ὄχι τὸ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ τυχόντος ἤχου τῆς ἑβδομάδος (Προθεωρία §8).) Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ τῆς Παρακλητικῆς Στιχηρὰ, Δόξα Ὦ τῆς στερεᾶς καὶ ἀδαμαντίνου σου ψυχῆς, Καὶ νῦν Ἁμαρτωλῶν τὰς δεήσεις προσδεχομένη, (τὸ Θεοτοκίον τῶν Ἀποστίχων Ἑσπερινοῦ Δευτέρας, ἦχος Α΄). Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου Ἰγνατίου καὶ τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου Βονιφατίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον Τὸ ἀπ’ αἰῶνος ἀπόκρυφον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὴν συνήθη Ἀκολουθίαν τοῦ Ὄρθρου, οἱ Κανόνες χῦμα, εἰς τὴν η΄ Ὠδὴν ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὰ ἐξαποστειλάρια ἀμφότερα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Οἱ Αἶνοι τῆς Ὀκτωήχου. Σοὶ Δόξα πρέπει χῦμα. Τὰ ἀπόστιχα τῆς Ὀκτωήχου, Δόξα Στήλη ἔμψυχος. Καὶ νῦν Ἁμαρτωλῶν τὰς δεήσεις, Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι τῷ Κυρίῳ, τὸ Τρισάγιον καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι κτλ. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, Ἀπολυτίκια Καὶ τρόπων μέτοχος ... Ὁ Μάρτυς σου Κύριε καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ὡς ἀπαρχὰς τῆς φύσεως, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Σαββάτου πρὸ τῆς Χρ. Γεννήσεως, τὸ Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Κυριακὴ πρὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ Γεννήσεως.

Σημείωσις. Τῇ ἀπὸ τῆς ιη΄ μέχρι τῆς κδ΄ τοῦ αὐτοῦ μηνὸς Κυριακῇ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν ἁγίων Πατέρων ὡς ἀκολούθως.

ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ πρὸ τῆς Χ. Γεννήσεως Κυριακὴ τῇ ιη΄ ἢ τῇ ιθ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῶν Πατέρων Τὰ τῶν Πατέρων σήμερον πιστοὶ δ΄, Δόξα

*(Printed Page 252)*

=== LEAF p268 ===
[English Facing Translation: December 20: St. Ignatius Transferred to Dec 19 / Sunday before Nativity: Holy Fathers, Case 1 (p. 253)]

253

19th of the month, i.e. Saturday and performed as follows: On Friday evening at "Lord, I have cried" 3 Prosomia of Saint Ignatios and 3 of Saint Boniface. Glory, "God-bearing Ignatios," Now and ever "The King of Heaven." {This is the first Theotokion of Great Vespers of Saturday, Mode IV Plagal; the question arises why this Theotokion was selected in this instance and not the Theotokion of the Mode of the week as is normally done [Protheoria, Para. 8]}. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the Stichira of the Paraklitiki, Glory "O your solid and firm soul," Now and ever, "Receiving the petitions of sinners" {the Theotokion of the Aposticha of Vespers, Monday evening, Mode I}. Apolytikia of Saint Ignatios and of Saint Boniface and the Theotokion "The mystery hidden," and Dismissal.

3.    On Saturday morning, after the customary Service of Matins, the Canons are read, at the 8th Ode the Irmos is sung and we sing "More honorable"; then both the Exapostilaria and the Theotokion. The Praises of the Octoichos. "To you belong Glory" read, the Aposticha of the Octoichos, Glory, "Living buttress," Now and ever, "Receiving the petitions of sinners." "It is good to confess to the Lord," the Trisagion and the Apolytikion of the Saint. In the Liturgy, the Antiphons "It is good to confess to the Lord" etc. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: "You lent yourself to the Apostles' way," "Your martyr, O Lord," that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "As first-fruit of nature." The Apostolos and Gospel of the Saturday before Christ's Nativity, Communion Hymn "Blessed are those whom you have chosen," "We have seen [true] the light," and Dismissal.

Sunday before the Nativity of Christ

Note: On the Sunday from the 18th to 24th of this month the Service of the Holy Fathers is sung as follows:

SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Sunday before the Nativity of Christ occurs on the 18th or 19th of the Month, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Fathers "We celebrate today the memory of the

*(Printed Page 253)*

=== LEAF p269 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday before Nativity: Holy Fathers, Case 1 Concl. (p. 254)]

254

Δανιὴλ ἀνὴρ ἐπιθυμιῶν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ Δόξα Χαίρετε προφῆται τίμιοι, Καὶ νῦν Ὢ θαύματος καινοῦ. Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Μεγάλα τὰ τῆς πίστεως κατορθώματα, Θεοτοκίον Πάντα ὑπὲρ ἔννοιαν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὸ Δόξα Βολίδες ἀστράπτοντες, Καὶ νῦν Ἁμαρτωλῶν τὰς δεήσεις (τὸ Θεοτοκίον τῶν Ἀποστίχων ἑσπερινοῦ Δευτέρας, ἦχος Α΄), τα Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Μεγάλα τὰ τῆς πίστεως κατορθώματα καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Μηναίου Κύματι θαλάσσης, ὁ στίχος τοῦ α΄ μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν Τροπαρίου Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ Ἀναστάσει σου Κύριε, τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν Ἅγιοι τοῦ θεοῦ, εἰς τὰ τελευταῖα δύο Τροπάρια Δόξα Καὶ νῦν· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Ἄγγελος Παίδων ἐδρόσισε κάμινον καὶ τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον χῦμα· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸ ὑπόμνημα τῶν Πατέρων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χριστὸς γεννᾶται, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Πατέρων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον τῆς Ὀκτωήχου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Πατέρων δ΄, Δόξα, Τῶν νομικῶν διδαγμάτων ὁ σύλλογος, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Προπατόρων δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Πατέρων Μεγάλα τὰ τῆς πίστεως κατορθώματα καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἡ Παρθένος σήμερον, ὁ Ἀπόστολος Ἀδελφοὶ πίστει παρῴκησεν Ἀβραὰμ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Βίβλος γενέσεως Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 254)*

=== LEAF p270 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday before Nativity: Holy Fathers, Case 1 Concl. (p. 255)]

255

ancestors of Christ," Glory "Daniel the man of desires," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "Rejoice, O honored prophets," Now and ever, "Here is a new wonder." The Apolytikia of the Resurrection, then "Great are the accomplishments of faith," and the Theotokion "Beyond understanding," and Dismissal.

2.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and Glory, "Shining like meteors," Now and ever, "Receiving the petitions of sinners" {Theotokion of Aposticha of Vespers Monday evening, Mode I}, the Triadic "It is meet"; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Great are the accomplishments of faith" and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canon of the Mineon "Waves of the sea"; the Verse of the first hymn after the Irmos is "Glory to Your holy Resurrection, O Lord"; for the rest of the hymns, the Verse "Saints of God" is sung; and at the last two hymns we use Glory Now and ever. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi "An angel dampened the fire of the Children" and the Resurrection Kontakion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Fathers, the Minologion of the Saints of the day and the Postscript of the Fathers. The Katavasie "Christ is born," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers, and the Theotokion of the Octoichos. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Fathers. Glory, "The collection of Mosaic teachings," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."

3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Forefathers. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Fathers "Great are the accomplishments of Faith," that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "Today the Virgin." Apostolos "Brethren by faith Abraham" and Gospel "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ." At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 255)*
