=== LEAF p931 ===
[Original Greek Text: Funeral Office: Evlogitaria Conclusion and Idiomela by Tone (Part 4, p. 916)]

916

σου. — Δόξα, Τὸ τριλαμπὲς τῆς μιᾶς θεότητος. — Καὶ νῦν, Χαῖρε σεμνὴ ἡ θεὸν σαρκὶ τεκοῦσα. — Ἀλληλούϊα, Ἀλληλούϊα, Ἀλληλούϊα, δόξα σοι ὁ θεός, καὶ ἀνάπαυσον τὸν δοῦλόν σου. [6] Ἐὰν ὦσι πολλοὶ Ἱερεῖς, εἰς ἕνα ἕκαστον Τροπάριον μνημονεύουσι, τοῦ Διακόνου ἐκφωνοῦντος ἐν ἑκάστῳ Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν (τὰ Νεκρώσιμα Εὐλογητάρια ὅρα ἐν τῷ Ὡρολογίῳ).

    Μετὰ τὸ τέλος τῶν Εὐλογηταρίων οἱ χοροὶ ἄρχονται τῶν κατ’ ἦχον νεκρωσίμων Ἰδιομέλων.

Ἦχος α΄.

    Ποία τοῦ βίου τρυφὴ διαμένει λύπης ἀμέτοχος; ποία δόξα ἕστηκεν ἐπὶ γῆς ἀμετάθετος; πάντα σκιᾶς ἀσθενέστερα, πάντα ὀνείρων ἀπατηλότερα, μία ῥοπὴ καὶ ταῦτα πάντα θάνατος διαδέχεται· ἀλλ’ ἐν τῷ φωτί, Χριστέ, τοῦ προσώπου σου, καὶ τῷ γλυκασμῷ τῆς σῆς ὡραιότητος, ὃν ἐξελέξω ἀνάπαυσον ὡς φιλάνθρωπος.

Ἦχος β΄.

    Ὡς ἄνθος μαραίνεται, καὶ ὡς ὄναρ παρέρχεται, καὶ διαλύεται πᾶς ἄνθρωπος· πάλιν δὲ ἠχούσης τῆς σάλπιγγος, νεκροί, ὡς ἐν συσσεισμῷ, πάντες ἀναστήσονται πρὸς τὴν σὴν ὑπάντησιν, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός· τότε, Δέσποτα, ὃν μετέστησας ἐξ ἡμῶν, ἐν ταῖς τῶν Ἁγίων σου κατάταξον σκηναῖς, τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ σοῦ δούλου, Χριστέ.

Ἦχος γ΄.

    Πάντα ματαιότης τὰ ἀνθρώπινα, ὅσα οὐχ ὑπάρχει μετὰ θάνατον· οὐ παραμένει ὁ πλοῦτος, οὐ συνοδεύει ἡ δόξα· ἐπελθὼν γὰρ ὁ θάνατος, ταῦτα πάντα ἐξηφάνισται· διὸ Χριστῷ τῷ ἀθανάτῳ βασιλεῖ βοήσωμεν, τὸν μεταστάντα ἐξ ἡμῶν ἀνάπαυσον, ἔνθα πάντων ἐστὶν εὐφραινομένων ἡ κατοικία.

Ἦχος δ΄.

---
[6] [Αὕτη ἡ ἐπιπρόσθετος φράσις εὑρίσκεται εἰς τοῦ Καριτσιώτη τὸ Μουσικὸν Ἁγιασματάριον, σελ. 36.]

*(Printed Page 916)*

=== LEAF p932 ===
[English Facing Translation: Funeral Office: Evlogitaria Conclusion and Idiomela by Mode (Part 4, p. 917)]

917

salvation gave birth to God in the flesh. — Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to You, O God {and give rest to your servant.} {6} If there are many Priests, after each of these Evlogitaria, the Deacon says “Let us pray to the Lord.” And from all the Priests present, each Priest, in order of seniority of ordination, says “For You are the Resurrection.” (See the Orologion for the text of the Evlogitaria for the Reposed.)

    After the Evlogitaria, the Choirs begin the following Idiomela for the departed, written in each of the Eight Modes:

Mode I

What pleasure in life is not accompanied by sorrow? What glory remains unchanged on earth? All things are flimsier than shadows, more deceptive than dreams. In but an instant, death displaces everything. But in the light of Your countenance, O Christ, in the sweetness of Your beauty, give rest to him whom You have chosen, as lover of mankind.

Mode II

Every mortal is like a flower that withers, a passing dream that vanishes. Yet when the trumpet sounds, all the dead will rise as in an earthquake to meet you, Christ our God. Will You then, Master, assign a place where Your Saints abide for the soul of him whom You have summoned from our midst.

Mode III

All human pursuits are vain; they have no being after death. Wealth does not remain; glory does not accompany along the way. Once death befalls, all these vanish utterly. So let us cry to the immortal Christ: “Give rest to him who has left our company in the dwelling place of all who rejoice.”

Mode IV

Truly awesome is the mystery of death: how the soul’s harmony with the body is violently broken; how the natural bond that united them is severed by the divine will. Therefore, we entreat You; giver of life and lover of

---
{6} {The phrase “and give rest to your servant,” is found in Karitsiotis’ Musikon Agiasmatarion, p 36.}

*(Printed Page 917)*

=== LEAF p933 ===
[Original Greek Text: Funeral Office: Idiomela Concluded and Theotokion (Part 5, p. 918)]

918

ὃ σὲ ἱκετεύομεν, τὸν μεταστάντα ἀνάπαυσον, ἐν σκηναῖς τῶν δικαίων σου ζωοδότα φιλάνθρωπε.

Ἦχος πλάγιος α΄.

    Ἐμνήσθην τοῦ Προφήτου βοῶντος, ἐγώ εἰμι γῆ καὶ σποδός, καὶ πάλιν κατενόησα ἐν τοῖς μνήμασι, καὶ εἶδον τὰ ὀστᾶ τὰ γεγυμνωμένα καὶ εἶπον, ἆρα τίς ἐστι βασιλεύς, ἢ στρατιώτης; ἢ πλούσιος, ἢ πένης; ἢ δίκαιος, ἢ ἁμαρτωλός; Ἀλλὰ ἀνάπαυσον, Κύριε, μετὰ δικαίων τὸν δοῦλόν σου ὡς φιλάνθρωπος.

Ἦχος πλάγιος β΄.

    Ἀρχή μοι καὶ ὑπόστασις, τὸ πλαστουργόν σου γέγονε πρόσταγμα· βουληθεὶς γὰρ ἐξ ἀοράτου τε καὶ ὁρατῆς μέ ζῴων συμπῆξαι φύσεως, γῆθέν μου τὸ σῶμα διέπλασας, δέδωκας δέ μοι ψυχήν, τῇ θείᾳ σου καὶ ζωοποιῷ ἐμπνεύσει· δι’ ὃ Χριστέ, τὸν δοῦλόν σου, ἐν χώρᾳ ζώντων, ἐν σκηναῖς δικαίων κατάταξον.

Ἦχος βαρύς.

    Ἀνάπαυσον, Σωτὴρ ἡμῶν ζωοδότα, ὃν μετέστησας ἀδελφὸν ἡμῶν ἐκ τῶν προσκαίρων, κράζοντα, δόξα σοι.

Ἦχος πλάγιος δ΄.

    Θρηνῶ καὶ ὀδύρομαι ὅταν ἐννοήσω τὸν θάνατον καὶ ἴδω ἐν τοῖς τάφοις κειμένην τὴν κατ’ εἰκόνα θεοῦ πλασθεῖσαν ἡμῖν ὡραιότητα ἄμορφον, ἄδοξον, μὴ ἔχουσαν εἶδος. Ὢ τοῦ θαύματος! τί τὸ περὶ ἡμᾶς τοῦτο γέγονε μυστήριον; πῶς παρεδόθημεν τῇ φθορᾷ; πῶς συνεζεύχθημεν τῷ θανάτῳ; ὄντως θεοῦ προστάξει, ὡς γέγραπται, τοῦ παρέχοντος τοῖς μεταστᾶσι τὴν ἀνάπαυσιν.

Δόξα Πατρὶ (ὁ αὐτός)

    Ὁ θάνατός σου, Κύριε, ἀθανασίας γέγονε πρόξενος, εἰ μὴ γὰρ ἐν μνήματι κατετέθης, οὐκ ἂν ὁ Παράδεισος ἠνέῳκτο, δι’ ὃ τὸν μεταστάντα ἀνάπαυσον, ὡς φιλάνθρωπος.

*(Printed Page 918)*

=== LEAF p934 ===
[English Facing Translation: Funeral Office: Idiomela Concluded and Theotokion (Part 5, p. 919)]

919

mankind, to him now departed grant rest where the righteous ones dwell.

Mode I Plagal

I called to mind the prophet, crying, “I am but dust and ashes.” In addition, I studied the tombs once more, considered the naked bones, and asked myself: Now which of these was king, and which the common soldier? Which was the rich man, which the indigent? Which man was upright and which a sinner? Nevertheless, Lord, in Your compassion, to Your servant give rest, among the righteous.

Mode II Plagal

Your creating command became my beginning and my being. For it was Your will to bring together visible and invisible nature to fashion me a living creature. You shaped my body from the earth then gave me a spirit by Your divine and quickening breath. Wherefore, O Savior, give rest to Your servant in the land of the living, where the righteous dwell.

Mode Varys

O Savior, giver of life, grant rest to our brother whom You called away from temporal things, crying to You, “Glory to You, O Lord!”

Mode IV Plagal

I weep and I lament when I ponder death, when I see our beauty, formed in God’s image, lying in the tombs bereft of form, disfigured, without glory. O, the wonder of it! How did this mystery befall us? How were we given over to decay? How were we paired with death? Surely, as it is written, by the command of God, who gives rest to the departed.

Glory (same Mode)

Your death, Lord, became the cause of immortality. For had You not lain in the tomb, then Paradise would not have been opened. Wherefore, as loving God give rest to him who is now parted from us.

*(Printed Page 919)*

=== LEAF p935 ===
[Original Greek Text: Funeral Office: Dismissal, Bright Week Rubrics, and Universal Order (Part 6, p. 920)]

920

Καὶ νῦν (ὁ αὐτός)

    Ἁγνὴ Παρθένε, τοῦ Λόγου Πύλη, τοῦ θεοῦ ἡμῶν μήτηρ ἱκέτευσε ἐλεηθῆναι τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ.

    Καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Ἀπόστολος, Οὐ θέλω ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν περὶ τῶν κεκοιμημένων, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, Εἶπεν ὁ Κύριος πρὸς τοὺς ἐληλυθότας πρὸς αὐτὸν Ἰουδαίους, ὁ Διάκονος, Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεός, καὶ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς τὰς δύο συγχωρητικὰς Εὐχάς, καὶ εἰς τὸ τέλος, Ὁ Θεὸς τῶν πνευμάτων καὶ πάσης σαρκός, ὁ Διάκονος, Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, καὶ μνημονεύουσιν αὖθις ἅπαντες οἱ παρευρισκόμενοι Ἱερεῖς, καὶ ἀκολούθως ἡ παρὰ τοῦ Ἀρχιερέως νεκρώσιμος Ἀπόλυσις. Εἰς δὲ τὸν τελευταῖον τοῦ λειψάνου ἀσπασμὸν ψάλλεται ὑπὸ τοῦ β΄ χοροῦ τὸ Προσόμοιον, Δεῦτε τελευταῖον ἀσπασμὸν δῶμεν ἀδελφοὶ τῷ θανόντι, εὐχαριστοῦντες Θεῷ, καὶ συνοδεύομεν τὸ λείψανον μέχρι τοῦ τάφου ψάλλοντες τὸ Θρηνῶ καὶ ὀδύρομαι.

    Ἐὰν ᾖ Διακαινήσιμος ἑβδομάς, ψάλλομεν μέχρι τοῦ Ναοῦ τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη (τὸ αὐτὸ καὶ μέχρι τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τοῦ Πάσχα). Μετὰ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ψάλλει τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ἅπαξ καὶ οἱ δύο Χοροὶ ἀνὰ μίαν, εἶτα ψάλλονται αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Πάσχα· εἰς τὸ τέλος δὲ ἑκάστης Καταβασίας τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρίς, τὸ Ἀναστὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, καὶ ὁ Διάκονος Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς Ὅτι σὺ εἶ ἡ ἀνάστασις· καὶ ἐν ταῖς λοιπαῖς οἱ Ἱερεῖς, ἀπ’ θ΄ ψάλλεται τὸ Σαρκὶ ὑπνώσας δίς, καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ τέλος ὁ Διάκονος τὸ Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεός, καὶ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἀναγινώσκει τὰς δύο συγχωρητικὰς Εὐχάς· εἰς τὸ τέλος Ὁ Θεὸς τῶν πνευμάτων κτλ. ὡς ἀνωτέρω καὶ ἡ Ἀπόλυσις, ἀντὶ δὲ τοῦ Δεῦτε τελευταῖον ἀσπασμὸν ψάλλομεν τὸ Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ αὐτὸ ψάλλομεν καὶ μέχρι τοῦ τάφου. Μετὰ τὴν Διακαινήσιμον ἑβδομάδα, ἀφοῦ εἰσέλθωμεν ἐν τῷ Ναῷ μετὰ τοῦ λειψάνου, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, εἶτα τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἀρχιερέως ἅπαξ, καὶ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν Χορῶν· καὶ ἀκολούθως ἡ νεκρώσιμος συνήθης Ἀκολουθία, ὡς προδιετυπώθη.

    Ἰστέον δέ, ὅτι ἡ αὐτὴ τάξις τῆς νεκρωσίμου Ἀκολουθίας ψάλλεται εἰς ἅπαντας τοὺς κοιμηθέντας, καὶ εἰς Βασιλεῖς, Πατριάρχας, Ἀρχιερεῖς, Ἱερεῖς, καὶ εἰς ἄνδρας καὶ γυναῖκας, μικρούς τε καὶ μεγάλους, καὶ εἰς αὐτὰ ἔτι τὰ βρέφη, εἰς ὧν τὴν Ἀκολουθίαν ἀφαιροῦνται τὰ κατ’ ἦχον Ἰδιόμελα, λέγεται δὲ καὶ ἡ διὰ τὰ βρέφη ἐν τῷ Εὐχολογίῳ σημειουμένη Εὐχή, ὡς καὶ ἴδιος Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον.
    Πάντες γὰρ ὑμεῖς εἷς ἐστε ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ. Παύλου

*(Printed Page 920)*

=== LEAF p936 ===
[English Facing Translation: Funeral Office: Dismissal, Bright Week Rubrics, and Universal Order (Part 6, p. 921)]

921

Now and ever (same Mode)

Pure Virgin, gateway for the Word, Mother of our God, intercede that his soul may know mercy.

    And immediately the Apostolos “I would not have you ignorant concerning those who are asleep,” and the Gospel “The Lord said to the Jews who came to him.” The Deacon: “Have mercy on us, O God” and the Hierarch recites the two Prayers of forgiveness, and at the end, “God of spirits and all flesh.” The Deacon intones “Let us pray to the Lord” and all the Priests present commemorate [the departed]; then follows the Dismissal Prayer for the Reposed by the Hierarch. During the final respects and kissing of the departed, the Second Choir chants the Prosomion “Come, brethren, let us give one final kiss to the departed, thanking God”; and we accompany the corpse to the tomb chanting the “I weep and I lament.”

    If we are in Bright [Renewal] Week, as we go into the Church, we chant “Christ is risen” (we chant this hymn until the Leave-taking of Easter). After the “Blessed is God,” the Archbishop chants the “Christ is risen” once and each of the two Choirs chant it also once. Then are sung the Katavasie of the Canon of Easter. At the end of each Katavasia, we chant “Christ is risen” three times and the “Jesus, having risen.” The Deacon: “Let us pray to the Lord,” and the Archbishop “For You are the Resurrection” [after the First Katavasia]. After the remaining Katavasie, the Priests [each at a time] intone this same Exclamation. After the 9th Katavasia, we chant “Having slept in the flesh as a mortal” twice, and immediately follow the Apostolos and the Gospel. At the end, the Deacon intones “Have mercy on us, O God,” and the Archbishop reads the two Prayers of Forgiveness. At the end, “God of spirits,” etc. as above. Instead of “Come, brethren [let us give] one final kiss,” we chant “It is the day of Resurrection” which we also sing up to the grave site. After Bright [Renewal] Week, after we enter the Church with the body of the departed, the Archbishop intones “Blessed is God.” Then he sings “Christ is risen” once and each of the two choirs sing it once, and the customary Service of the Dead follows, as described above.

    It is established that this order of the Service of the Dead is performed for all the departed, be they Kings, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Priests, and for men and women, young and old, and also for the infants themselves, from whose Service are omitted the Idiomela by Mode [“What pleasure in life,” etc.]. In their place is said the Prayer assigned to infants, as well as the Gospel, both to be found in the Efchologion: 2 Corinthians,

*(Printed Page 921)*

=== LEAF p937 ===
[Original Greek Text: Memorial Services & Colophon: End of the Typikon (p. 922)]

922

ἐπιστολὴ Β΄, πρὸς Κορινθ. Κεφ. Γ΄.) [Κατὰ τὸ Μικρὸν Εὐχολόγιον, ὁ σωστὸς Ἀπόστολος εἶναι Ῥωμαίους, Κεφ. Ϛ΄, 9-11 «Χριστὸς ἐγερθεὶς ἐκ νεκρῶν..» Μικρὸν Εὐχολόγιον, Ἀποστολικὴ Διακονία, Ἀθῆναι, 1955, σελ. 233.]

ΠΕΡΙ ΜΝΗΜΟΣΥΝΩΝ

    Τὰ εἰς τοὺς κεκοιμημένους ἀδελφοὺς γινόμενα Τρίτα δηλοῦσι, κατὰ τὸν Ἱερὸν Συμεὼν Θεσσαλονίκης, ὅτι ὁ κοιμηθεὶς ἀδελφὸς ὑπὸ τῆς Ἁγίας Τριάδος ἐξ ἀρχῆς συνετέθη. Τὰ δὲ Ἔνατα τῶν κεκοιμημένων σημαίνουσιν ὅτι ὁ διαλυθεὶς εἰς τὰ ἐξ ὧν συνετέθη, ἔχει νὰ συγκαταριθμηθῇ μετὰ τῶν ἐννέα αὔλων ταγμάτων τῶν Ἀγγέλων, ὡς ἄϋλος καὶ αὐτός. Τὰ δὲ τεσσαρακοστὰ δηλοῦσιν ὅτι, ἐν τῇ μελλούσῃ Ἀναστάσει συντεθεὶς πάλιν, κατὰ τρόπον ὑψηλότερον, ἔχει καὶ αὐτὸς νὰ ἀναληφθῇ ὡς ὁ Κύριος καὶ ἁρπαγεὶς ἐν νεφέλαις νὰ ὑπαντήσῃ τῷ Κριτῇ. Ταύτας τὰς τρεῖς καταστάσεις τοῦ ἀνθρώπου σημαίνουσι τὰ Τρίμηνα καὶ Ἑξάμηνα καὶ Ἐννεάμηνα. Καὶ ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν, ταῦτα τελοῦνται ὑπὲρ καθαρισμοῦ τοῦ ἀποθανόντος.

ΤΕΛΟΣ ΚΑΙ Τῼ ΘΕῼ ΔΟΞΑ

*(Printed Page 922)*

=== LEAF p938 ===
[English Facing Translation: Memorial Services & Colophon: End of the Typikon (p. 923)]

923

ch. 3 “All of you are in Christ Jesus.” [According to the Mikron Efchologion, the correct Apostolos reading in this case is Romans, ch. 6: 9-11 “Christ being raised from the dead.” Mikron Efchologion, Apostoliki Diakonia, Athens, 1955, p. 233.]

CONCERNING MEMORIAL SERVICES

    The Trita [three-day memorial service] performed for the departed brethren declare [signify], according to the Sacred Symeon of Thessalonika, that the brother fallen asleep was put together from the beginning by the Holy Trinity. The Enata [nine-day memorial service] performed for those fallen asleep declare [signify] that he who was dissolved back to the elements from which he was composed will be numbered among the nine incorporeal ranks of the Angels, being now incorporeal himself. The Tessarakonta [forty-day memorial service] declare that, if in the future Resurrection the departed person has been recomposed but in a higher manner, and he will ascend to Heaven like the Lord, taken up in the clouds to meet the Judge. The three-month, six-month, and nine-month memorial services signify the three different states of being of Man. And, simply speaking, these memorial services are performed for the spiritual purification of the dead person.

THE END AND TO GOD GLORY

*(Printed Page 923)*

=== LEAF p939 ===
[Original Greek Text: Preface to the Chart of the Feasts (Paschalion Table) (p. 924)]

924

ΠΙΝΑΞ ΤΟΥ ΕΟΡΤΟΔΡΟΜΙΟΥ

    Ὁ παρὼν Πίναξ τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου ἐγράφη ἀρχικῶς ἐπὶ τῇ βάσει τοῦ Ἰουλιανοῦ Ἡμερολογίου. Εἰς τὸ ἔτος 1921, ἡ Ἑλληνορθόδοξος Ἐκκλησία υἱοθέτησε τὸ Γρηγοριανὸν Ἡμερολόγιον. Ἐφ’ ὅσον τὸ παρὸν Τυπικὸν ἐξεδόθη τὸ ἔτος 1888, ἦτο φύσει ἀδύνατον διὰ τὸν Γεώργιον Βιολάκην ἵνα ἦτο ἐνήμερος αὐτῆς τῆς ἀλλαγῆς πρὸς τὸ Γρηγοριανὸν Ἡμερολόγιον.

    Διὰ νὰ καταστήσουν τὸν Πίνακα χρησιμότερον εἰς τὴν σημερινὴν ἐποχήν, οἱ συνθέται τοῦ παρόντος ἔργου (Δέμος καὶ Μπόγδανος) παρουσιάζουν τὰς ἡμερομηνίας τοῦ Ἰουλιανοῦ Ἡμερολογίου (ΙΗ) μετὰ τῶν ἀκριβῶς ἀντιστοίχων ἡμερομηνιῶν τοῦ Γρηγοριανοῦ Ἡμερολογίου (ΓΗ) μετὰ τῶν σχετικῶν ὁδηγιῶν.

*(Printed Page 924)*

=== LEAF p940 ===
[English Facing Translation: Preface to the Chart of the Feasts (Paschalion Table) (p. 925)]

925

CHART OF THE FEASTS

    The present Chart of the Feasts was originally written on the basis of the Julian Calendar. In the year 1921, the Greek Orthodox Church adopted the Gregorian Calendar. Since the present Typikon was published in 1888, it naturally was impossible for George Violakis to have been aware of this change to the Gregorian Calendar.

    In order to make this chart more useful in our time, the editors of the present work (Demos and Bogdanos) present the dates of the Julian Calendar (JC) together with the exactly corresponding dates in the Gregorian Calendar (GC) with the pertinent guidelines.

*(Printed Page 925)*
