=== LEAF p761 ===
[Original Greek Text: Holy Week: Great and Holy Monday (Matins Opening and Rubrics) (§§ 66 Concluded, 67 Opening) (p. 746)]

746

τῆς Μεγάλης Τεσσαρακοστῆς. Εἰς τὴν Συγχώρησιν ψάλλεται τὸ Σφαγήν σου τὴν ἄδικον, ἡ Ἀπόλυσις Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς . . . ἐρχόμενος ὁ Κύριος ἐπὶ τὸ ἑκούσιον πάθος διὰ τὴν ἡμῶν σωτηρίαν ³⁷, καὶ τὸ Δι' εὐχῶν.

ΜΕΓΑΛΗ ΔΕΥΤΕΡΑ ΕΙΣ ΤΟΝ ΟΡΘΡΟΝ

67.    Ὁ Ἱερεὺς Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, ὁ Προεστὼς Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, δόξα σοι, τὸ Βασιλεῦ οὐράνιε, ὁ Ἀναγνώστης τὸ Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, ὁ Ἀναγνώστης Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ', Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν γ' καὶ τοὺς ψαλμοὺς Ἐπακούσαι σου Κύριος, κτλ. (ἀναγινωσκομένων τούτων βραδέως, ὁ Ἱερεὺς θυμιᾷ τὸν λαὸν διὰ κατζίου)· μετὰ τὸ Τρισάγιον, Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, Σῶσον Κύριε κτλ. καὶ ὁ Προϊστάμενος λέγει τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον. Μετὰ τὴν Συναπτήν, ψάλλεται μετὰ τῶν ὡρισμένων αὐτοῦ Στίχων Ἐκ νυκτὸς ὀρθρίζει, τὸ Μέγα Ἀλληλουϊάριον δίς, καὶ δὶς τὸ μικρὸν καὶ τὸ Τροπάριον Ἰδοὺ ὁ νυμφίος ἔρχεται ἐκ τρίτου δίς, μὲν ἀργῶς, ἅπαξ δὲ συντόμως· εἰς τὸ τέλος τοῦ πρώτου μὲν λέγομεν Προστασίαις τῶν Ἀσωμάτων σῶσον ἡμᾶς ³⁸, τοῦ δευτέρου δὲ συνάπτομεν τὸ χαρακτηριστικὸν τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, λέγοντες Πρεσβείαις τοῦ Ἁγίου ἢ τῶν Ἁγίων σῶσον ἡμᾶς, καὶ εἰς τὸ τρίτον Διὰ τῆς Θεοτόκου ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον³⁹ καὶ ἀκολούθως ψάλλονται τὰ γ' κατὰ σειρὰν Καθίσματα ἀργῶς, τὰ δύο ἀνὰ μίαν καὶ τὸ γ' δίς, καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Ἱερεὺς Καὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ καταξιωθῆναι ἡμᾶς, καὶ

---
37. Ἡ αὐτὴ Ἀπόλυσις τηρεῖται μέχρι τῆς Μεγάλης Τετάρτης ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ καὶ ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ.
38. Τῇ Μ. Τρίτῃ Πρεσβείαις τοῦ Προδρόμου σῶσον ἡμᾶς· τῇ Μ. Τετάρτῃ Δυνάμει τοῦ Σταυροῦ σου σῶσον ἡμᾶς.
39. Συνήθως παραλείπεται τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας ἐν ταῖς πλείσταις τῶν ἱερῶν Ἐκκλησιῶν κατὰ τοὺς ὄρθρους τούτους, εἴτε χάριν τῆς συντομίας εἴτε καὶ διότι εἰσὶ πέντε Καθίσματα ὡρισμένα καθ' ἑκάστην τῶν τριῶν πρώτων ἡμερῶν τῆς Μ. Ἑβδομάδος, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται ἰδιαιτέρως τὸ πρωΐ ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἱερέως· ἀλλ' εὐχῆς ἔργον ἐστὶν ἵνα ἀναγινώσκηται μέρος τοὐλάχιστον τῶν πέντε Καθισμάτων εἰς ἀκρόασιν καὶ τοῦ λαοῦ, καθ' ὅσον μάλιστα τὸ Ψαλτήριον ἐθεωρήθη ἀνέκαθεν ἡ βάσις τῶν ἐκκλησιαστικῶν ἡμῶν προσευχῶν καὶ ἡ ἐπιούσιος πνευματικὴ τροφὴ ἑκάστου χριστιανοῦ, ὡς ἐσημειώθη ἐν τῇ Προθεωρίᾳ §3 ὑποσημ. 3.

*(Printed Page 746)*

=== LEAF p762 ===
[English Facing Translation: Holy Week: Great and Holy Monday (Matins Opening and Rubrics) (§§ 66 Concluded, 67 Opening) (p. 747)]

747

previous Sundays of Great Lent. At the rite of forgiveness, the Stavrotheotokion “{When the Virgin beheld} Your unjust slaughter,” the Dismissal “Glory to You our God, glory to You... You Who did come to voluntary sufferings for our salvation,” ³⁷ and the “Through the prayers {of our Fathers the Saints, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.}”

GREAT MONDAY AT MATINS

67.    Priest: “Blessed is our God {always}.” The Proestos: “Glory to You, our God, glory to You. O Heavenly King, {Comforter, the Spirit of Truth.}” Reader: Trisagion. Priest: “For Yours is {the Kingdom, and the Power....}” Reader: “{Amen.} Lord, have mercy” (12 times). {Glory, Now and ever,} “O come let us worship and bow down...” (3 times) and Psalm 19 “The Lord answer you in the day of trouble” {and Psalm 20 “In Your strength the king rejoices, O Lord.”} (While these Psalms are being read slowly, the Priest censes the people with the small hand censer (Katzion). After the Trisagion, “For Yours is,” then “Lord, save Your people.” {Glory, “Christ our God, Who were of Your own will lifted up on the Cross,” Now and ever, “O awesome and ever-present protection.”} The Exapsalmos is read by the Proistamenos (Dean of the Church). After the Litany, the Great “Alliluarion” [several Alleluia's] is sung with its assigned verses. “{My spirit seeks You early in the night watches.” Then the Troparion “Behold, the Bridegroom comes {in the middle of the night”} (three times — twice slowly and once rapidly). At the end of the first time, we chant “...through the protection of the Heavenly hosts save us.”³⁸ At the second time, we add the characteristic phrase of the Saint of the Church “...through the intercessions of Your Saint (or your Saints) save us.” At the third time we chant the “through the Theotokos have mercy on us.” {The Small Litany,} the {Kathismata of} the Psalter³⁹ and the 3 Kathismata {of the

---
37. This dismissal is used until Holy Wednesday both in Matins and in the Liturgy.
38. On Great and Holy Tuesday: “...through the intercessions of the Forerunner save us.” On Great and Holy Wednesday: “...by the power of Your Cross, save us.”
39. The Psalter of the day is customarily omitted in most of the Churches at these Matins services, either for the sake of brevity or because there are Five Kathismata designated for every day of the first three days of the Great and Holy Week, and it is read separately in the morning by the Priest; but the function of prayer is that at least part of the Five Kathismata be read for the hearing of the laity, in as much as we viewed the Psalter from the beginning as the basis of our ecclesiastical prayers and the necessary daily spiritual food of each and every Christian, as was noted in the Provisions [Protheoria] Paragraph 3, note 3.

*(Printed Page 747)*

=== LEAF p763 ===
[Original Greek Text: Holy Week: Great and Holy Monday (Matins Concluded) (§ 67 Concluded) (p. 748)]

748

ἀναγινώσκει τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, μεθ' ὃ ὁ Ν' ψαλμὸς καὶ τὰ Τριῴδια ἀνὰ ς' ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ, καὶ αὖθις ὁ Εἱρμὸς ἀργῶς. ἡ Αἴτησις, τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου· εἶτα ἡ η' Ὠδὴ μετὰ τοῦ Εἱρμοῦ, καὶ ἀντὶ μὲν τοῦ Δόξα, λέγομεν Εὐλογοῦμεν Πατέρα, Υἱὸν καὶ Ἅγιον Πνεῦμα τὸν Κύριον, εἰς δὲ τὸν Εἱρμὸν Αἰνοῦμεν, εὐλογοῦμεν καὶ προσκυνοῦμεν τὸν Κύριον· εἶτα Τὴν θεοτόκον καὶ μητέρα τοῦ φωτὸς καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ θ' Ὠδὴ μετὰ τοῦ Εἱρμοῦ αὖθις· εἰς τὸ τέλος ἡ Αἴτησις καὶ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον ἐκ γ', καὶ ψάλλομεν τὰ β' τῶν Αἴνων Ἰδιόμελα εἰς δ', Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Κύριε ἐρχόμενος. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους⁴⁰, ἱστῶμεν Στίχους δ', καὶ ψάλλομεν τὰ β' τῶν Αἴνων Ἰδιόμελα εἰς δ'. Δόξα καὶ νῦν, Κύριε ἐρχόμενος, τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει χῦμα καὶ μετὰ τὸ Πληρώσωμεν τὴν ἑωθινὴν δέησιν, ἄρχεται τῶν Ἀποστίχων ὁ α' Χορός, εἶτα Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ Τρισάγιον, Κοντάκιον Ὁ Ἰακὼβ ὠδύρετο, Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ' ⁴¹, Ὁ ὢν εὐλογητός, Ἐπουράνιε βασιλεῦ, τὰς τρεῖς Μ. μετανοίας, ἡ Ἀπόλυσις Ἐρχόμενος ὁ Κύριος ἐπὶ τὸ ἑκούσιον πάθος καὶ τὸ Δι' εὐχῶν⁴².

---
40. Εἰς τὸ Αἰνεῖτε [τῶν Αἴνων] ὁ Πατριάρχης ἢ Ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἀσπάζεται τὰς ἁγίας εἰκόνας τῶν παθῶν καὶ εὐλογήσας τὸν λαόν, τῶν Χορῶν ψαλλόντων τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη ἀνέρχεται αὖθις εἰς τὸ παραθρόνιον.
41. Ὅρα σημείωσιν 31.
42. Ἡ διάταξις αὕτη τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τηρεῖται καὶ ἐν ταῖς δυσὶν ἀκολούθοις ἡμέραις, τῇ Μ. Τρίτῃ καὶ τῇ Μ. Τετάρτῃ, εἴτε τὴν πρωΐαν, εἴτε ἀφ' ἑσπέρας γίνεται ὁ Ὄρθρος τοῦ Νυμφίου. Ἐν τῇ τελευταίᾳ περιπτώσει ὅμως συνήθως τὸ Ψαλτήριον ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ πρωΐ.

*(Printed Page 748)*

=== LEAF p764 ===
[English Facing Translation: Holy Week: Great and Holy Monday (Matins Concluded) (§ 67 Concluded) (p. 749)]

749

Triodion} are chanted according to the following order: Kathisma Four of the Psalter and “Your Passion, as a perfect light raises and shines upon the world this present day.... from” Kathisma Five and “O invisible Judge, how have You been seen and gone to be killed by iniquitous men....” Kathisma Six and “The present day brings the light of the first fruits of the Passion of the Lord....” Glory, Now and ever. Repeat “The present day...” and immediately the Priest: “Let us supplicate the Lord our God,” and he reads the Gospel {Matthew 21:18-43.} {Reader:} Psalm 50; then the First Ode of the Triodion Canon (each verse repeated) and immediately slowly the Irmos “{Let us sing a song to the Lord” is repeated as a Katavasia.} The [Small] Litany, Kontakion, Ikos, Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. Then the Eighth Ode with its Irmos and, instead of Glory, we say “We bless Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord.” Before the Irmos of the Eighth Ode is repeated as a Katavasia, the following verse is added: “We praise, we bless and worship the Lord.” Deacon: “{We magnify} the Theotokos and Mother of Light, {and honor her in hymns.}” Chanters: immediately the Ninth Ode with its Irmos. The Small Litany; Exapostilarion {“I see Your bridal chamber”} (3 times). At the Praises:⁴⁰ we sing the two Idiomela of the Praises (twice each). Glory, Now and ever, “O Lord, going to Your Passion”; the Small Doxology “To You belongs all glory” (read). After the Petitions: “Let us complete our morning supplication {to the Lord}.” The First Choir begins the Aposticha. At the conclusion of the Aposticha, the Priest: “It is a good thing to confess unto the Lord.” The Reader: the Trisagion, then the Kontakion “Jacob lamented {the loss of Joseph,}” “Lord have mercy” (12 times).⁴¹ Priest: “Wisdom. You Who are blessed, Christ our God, now and ever and to the ages of ages.” “O Heavenly King, {strengthen our faithful kings,}” the three Great Prostrations, and the Dismissal “{Glory to You, our God and our Hope, glory to You.} May Christ, our True God, the Lord, Who willingly came to His Passion for our salvation... Through the prayers {of our Holy Fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy upon us and save us}.”⁴²

---
40. At the “Praise,” [of the Praises] the Patriarch or the Archbishop kisses the Holy Icon of the Passion and, blessing the people with the choirs singing the “For many years,” he ascends immediately the Parathrone (Parathronion.)
41. See footnote 31.
42. This order of the Service is observed on the following two days, that is, on Holy Tuesday and Holy Wednesday, either in in the morning or in the evening, when the Matins of the Bridegroom takes place. If in the evening, then the Psalter is usually omitted and, instead, is read the following morning.

*(Printed Page 749)*

=== LEAF p765 ===
[Original Greek Text: Holy Week: Great Monday (Hours, Presanctified, Compline) and Great Tuesday (Matins, Hours, Presanctified) (§§ 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73) (p. 750)]

750

68.    Τὸ πρωῒ ἀναγινώσκονται πέντε Καθίσματα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἶτα αἱ Ὧραι λιταὶ μετὰ τοῦ Ἀπολυτικίου Ἰδοὺ ὁ Νυμφίος ἔρχεται καὶ τοῦ Κοντακίου Ὁ Ἰακὼβ ὠδύρετο· εἰς τὴν θ' Ὥραν ψάλλονται οἱ Μακαρισμοί, μετὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐχὴν Παναγία Τριάς, ἡ Ἀπόλυσις, καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ Ἑσπερινός.
69.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ ς' Ἰδιόμελα τῶν Αἴνων καὶ τῶν Ἀποστίχων, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Δευτέραν Εὔαν, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ εὐθὺς μετ' αὐτὸ Σοφία, ὀρθοί, ἀκούσωμεν... καὶ λέγεται τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.
70.    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Μέγα Ἀπόδειπνον, ὡς εἴθισται, μετὰ δὲ τὸ Δόξα ἐν Ὑψίστοις Θεῷ, ἄρχεται τοῦ Τριῳδίου ὁ β' Χορός, ἀπ' θ' ὁ Εἱρμὸς Τὸν προδηλωθέντα ἐν ὄρει, τὸ Τρισάγιον καὶ ἀκολούθως τὸ Κύριε τῶν δυνάμεων κτλ. τοῦ Μ. Ἀποδείπνου· εἰς τὴν Συγχώρησιν ψάλλεται τὸ Σφαγήν σου τὴν ἄδικον Χριστέ.

ΜΕΓΑΛΗ ΤΡΙΤΗ

71.    Ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς Μ. Τρίτης ψάλλεται ἀπαραλλάκτως κατὰ τὴν ἐν § 67 προεκτεθεῖσαν διάταξιν. (Ὅρα τῇ Μεγάλῃ Δευτέρᾳ).
72.    Τὸ πρωῒ πρὸ τοῦ Εὐλογητοῦ, ἀναγινώσκονται ἕτερα πέντε Καθίσματα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου καὶ αἱ Ὧραι λιταὶ ὡς χθές· μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν Παναγία Τριάς, ἡ Ἀπόλυσις, καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ Ἑσπερινός.

73.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ ς' Ἰδιόμελα τῶν Αἴνων καὶ τῶν Ἀποστίχων, ἅπερ ἐψάλησαν ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἰδού σοι τὸ τάλαντον, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ λοιπὴ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.

*(Printed Page 750)*

=== LEAF p766 ===
[English Facing Translation: Holy Week: Great Monday (Hours, Presanctified, Compline) and Great Tuesday (Matins, Hours, Presanctified, Compline Opening) (§§ 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74 Opening) (p. 751)]

751

68.    In the morning, the five Kathismata of the Psalter are read [Kathisma Four, Five, Six, Seven, and Eight] then the Hours with the Apolytikion “Behold, the Bridegroom comes....” and the Kontakion “Jacob lamented.” At the Ninth Hour, the Beatitudes are chanted; after the prayer “All-holy Trinity,” the Dismissal, and Vespers begin.
69.    At Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm {103} and Kathisma 18 [of the Psalter], at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the six Idiomela of the Praises and the Aposticha. Glory, Now and ever, “Finding the Egyptian woman another Eve.” The Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome Light,” and the Readings of the day: {Exodus 1:1-20 and Job 1:1-12.} Then the “Let my prayer arise” and immediately after it “Wisdom! Arise, let us hear [the Holy Gospel...]” and the Gospel {Matthew 24:3-35} and the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts.
70.    In the evening, as is customary, we read the Great Compline. After the Doxology “Glory to God in the Highest,” the Second Choir begins the Triodion Canon; after the Irmos of the Ninth Ode “The Establisher of the law,” the Trisagion, then “O Lord of Hosts” and the rest of the Great Compline. At the Forgiveness Rite, we chant “When the Virgin beheld Your unjust slaughter, O Christ, [she wailed].”

GREAT TUESDAY

71.    The Matins of Great Tuesday is chanted unalterably according to the rubrics of Great Monday, Paragraph 67.
72.    In the morning, before the “You are blessed,” the five Kathismata of the Psalter are read [Kathismata Nine, Ten, Eleven, Twelve and Thirteen], then the Hours with the Apolytikion “Behold the Bridegroom” and the Kontakion “Knowing the hour of the end.” {At the Ninth Hour the Beatitudes are chanted;} after the prayer “All-Holy Trinity,” the Dismissal, and Vespers begin.
73.    In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm (103) and Kathisma 18 [of the Psalter], at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the six Idiomela of the Praises and Aposticha which were chanted in Matins. Glory, Now and ever, “The Master has entrusted you with a talent.” The Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome Light,” the Readings of the day {Exodus 2:5-10 and Job 1:13-22.} Then “Let my prayer arise,” the Gospel of the day {Matthew 24:36-26:2} and the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts.
74.    That evening, the Great Compline; after “Glory to God in the

*(Printed Page 751)*

=== LEAF p767 ===
[Original Greek Text: Holy Week: Great Tuesday (Compline Concluded) and Great Wednesday (Matins, Hours, Presanctified, Compline Opening) (§§ 74 Concluded, 75, 76, 77 Opening) (p. 752)]

752

74.    Τὸ ἑσπέρας, τὸ Μ. Ἀπόδειπνον· μετὰ τὸ Δόξα ἐν Ὑψίστοις Θεῷ, ἄρχεται τοῦ Τριῳδίου ὁ α' Χορός· ἀπ' θ' ὁ Εἱρμὸς Τὴν ὑπερφυῶς σαρκί, τὸ Τρισάγιον, Κύριε τῶν Δυνάμεων κτλ. τοῦ Μ. Ἀποδείπνου· εἰς τὴν Συγχώρησιν, τὸ Σφαγήν σου τὴν ἄδικον, καὶ οὕτω λήγει τὸ Μέγα Ἀπόδειπνον καὶ τὸ Κύριε τῶν Δυνάμεων.

ΜΕΓΑΛΗ ΤΕΤΑΡΤΗ

75.    Ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου καὶ τῆς ἡμέρας ταύτης ψάλλεται ἀπαραλλάκτως⁴³ ὡς διετάχθη ἐν § 67.
       Τὸ δὲ πρωῒ ἀναγινώσκονται ἕτερα ε' Καθίσματα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, καὶ οὕτω πληροῦται ὅλον τὸ Ψαλτήριον, καταλιμπανομένων τῶν β' Καθισμάτων, ΙΖ' καὶ ΙΗ', τοῦ μὲν ὡς ἐν τῷ Μ. Σαββάτῳ ἀναγνωσθησομένου, τοῦ δὲ ὡς συχνάκις ἐν ἑκάστῃ Προηγιασμένῃ, καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐν ταῖς τρισὶ τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης ἀναγινωσκομένου, ἐπίσης ἀναγινώσκονται καὶ αἱ Ὧραι λιταί, ὡς κατὰ τὰς δύο προηγουμένας ἡμέρας, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν Παναγία Τριὰς ἡ Ἀπόλυσις, καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ Ἑσπερινός.
76.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἱστῶμεν Στίχους ι' καὶ ψάλλομεν πάντα τὰ Στιχηρά, ἅπερ ὡς Αἶνοι καὶ Ἀπόστιχα ἐψάλησαν ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Κύριε ἡ ἐν πολλαῖς ἁμαρτίαις, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ τὸ ὡρισμένον Εὐαγγέλιον, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ τῶν Προηγιασμένων Λειτουργία, ἥτις ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ τελευταία τῆς Μεγάλης Τεσσαρακοστῆς.
77.    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ μικρὸν Ἀπόδειπνον· μετὰ τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, ψάλλονται τὰ Τριῴδια Ἀνώγεων ἐστρωμένον μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, δόξα σοι· ἀπ' θ' ὁ Εἱρμὸς Ἀσπόρου συλλήψεως, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὑπὲρ τὴν πόρνην Ἀγαθέ, τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ', Ὁ ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ, τὸ

---
43. Τῇ νυκτὶ ταύτῃ εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα ψάλλεται ὑπὸ τοῦ β' Χοροῦ ἀργῶς καὶ μετὰ μέλους Κύριε ἡ ἐν πολλαῖς ἁμαρτίαις, ὅπερ θεωρεῖται μὲν ποίημα Κασσιανῆς μοναχῆς, ἀλλ' ἐν χειρογράφῳ Ἱεροσολυμιτικῷ φέρεται ὡς ποίημα Φωτίου πατριάρχου.

*(Printed Page 752)*

=== LEAF p768 ===
[English Facing Translation: Holy Week: Great Tuesday (Compline Concluded) and Great Wednesday (Matins, Hours, Presanctified, Compline Opening) (§§ 74 Concluded, 75, 76, 77 Opening) (p. 753)]

753

highest” [the Doxology], the First Choir begins the Triodion [the Canon with three Odes (3, 8, and 9)]. After the Irmos of the Ninth Ode “We magnify with faith her who has conceived.” The Trisagion, “O Lord of Hosts” and the rest of the Great Compline. At the Foregiveness Rite we chant the “When the Virgin beheld Your unjust slaughter, {O Christ, she wailed},” and in this manner the Great Compline and the “O Lord of Hosts” come to an end.

GREAT WEDNESDAY

75.    The Service of Matins and of this day is chanted unalterably⁴³ according to the rubrics of Paragraph 67.
       In the morning, another five Kathismata of the Psalter are read [Kathismata Fourteen, Fifteen, Sixteen, Nineteen and Twenty] and in this way the entire Psalter is completed, omitting the two Kathismata (Seventeen and Eighteen), the former because it will be read on Great Saturday, and the latter because it is read frequently in every Presanctified Liturgy and because it was already read on three days of this week. Also the Liti Hours are read as on the two previous days, and after the Prayer “All-Holy Trinity” the Dismissal and then Vespers begin.
76.    In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm (103) and “To the Lord” [Kathisma 18], at “Lord, I have cried,” we chant 10 Verses and all the Stichira which were chanted as Praises and Aposticha in Matins. Glory, Now and ever, “The woman who had fallen into many sins.” The Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome Light,” the Readings {Exodus 2:11-23 and Job 2:1-10}. Then “Let my prayer arise,” the Gospel {Matthew 26:6-16} and the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, which is also the last one in Great Lent.
77.    In the evening, the Small Compline is read. Then, after “It is meet,” the Three-Ode Canon “Furnished and ready” with the Verse “Glory to You our God, glory to You.” After the Irmos of the Ninth Ode “Past description is the childbirth from a conception without seed.” The

---
43. On this night at the Aposticha, the Second Choir sings “O Lord, the woman who had fallen into a multitude of sins,” which is most often viewed as a poem of Kassiani the nun. However, a Jerusalem manuscript carries it as a poem by the Patriarch Photios.

*(Printed Page 753)*

=== LEAF p769 ===
[Original Greek Text: Holy Week: Great Wednesday (Compline Concluded) and Great Thursday (Matins, Vespers Opening) (§§ 77 Concluded, 78, 79 Opening) (p. 754)]

754

Ἄσπιλε ἀμόλυντε, κτλ. καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΜΕΓΑΛΗ ΠΕΜΠΤΗ ΕΙΣ ΤΟΝ ΟΡΘΡΟΝ

78.    Μετὰ τὸν Ἑξάψαλμον καὶ τὴν Μ. Συναπτήν, ψάλλομεν μετὰ Στίχων τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα εἰς ἦχον πλ. δ' τετράκις, καὶ τὸ Τροπάριον Ὅτε οἱ ἔνδοξοι Μαθηταὶ ἐκ γ' καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς ἡμέρας, εἶτα ὁ Ν' ψαλμός, καὶ ὁ Κανὼν ἄνευ Στίχων μετὰ τῆς Καταβασίας ἐν τέλει ἑκάστης Ὠδῆς. Ἀπὸ γ' Ὠδῆς τὰ Καθίσματα· ἀφ' ς' τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν τῆς η' Ὠδῆς, γίνεται ἡ Ἐκφώνησις Τὴν θεοτόκον καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ θ' Ὠδή, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον ἐκ γ', οἱ Αἶνοι εἰς δ', Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὃν ἐκήρυξεν Ἀμνόν, τὸ Σοὶ Δόξα πρέπει χῦμα, Πληρώσωμεν τὴν Ἑωθινήν, καὶ τὰ δ' Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα, Ὁ τρόπος σου δολιότης, Καὶ νῦν, Μυσταγωγῶν σου Κύριε, Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Τροπάριον τῆς Προφητείας, καὶ ἡ Προφητεία. Ἐκτενής, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

79.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ ε' Ἰδιόμελα τῶν Αἴνων δευτεροῦντες τὸ α', Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Γέννημα ἐχιδνῶν, Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς

*(Printed Page 754)*

=== LEAF p770 ===
[English Facing Translation: Holy Week: Great Wednesday (Compline Concluded) and Great Thursday (Matins, Vespers Opening) (§§ 77 Concluded, 78, 79 Opening) (p. 755)]

755

Trisagion; the Kontakion “Having transgressed more than the harlot”; “Lord, have mercy” (40 times), “You Who at all times,” the “O Virgin pure, spotless” etc., and the Dismissal.

GREAT THURSDAY AT MATINS

78.    {At Matins} after the Exapsalmos and the Great Litany, we sing “Alleluia” with its verses in Mode IV Plagal four times and the Troparion “When the glorious disciples {were enlightened at the Supper during the washing of the feet” (3 times)} and then the Gospel of Matins of the day {Luke 22:1-39.} Then, Psalm 50, the Canon without verses and the Katavasia at the end of each Ode. After the Third Ode, the Kathismata {“He Who alone loves mankind,” Glory, “Having humbled Yourself through compassion,” Now and ever, “Eating, O Master, with Your disciples.”} After the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos, the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. After the Irmos of the Eighth Ode is chanted {as a Katavasia}, the Deacon: “The Theotokos {and Mother...}” and the Ninth Ode is chanted. The Exapostilarion “[I see Your bridal chamber...]” (3 times.) At the Praises, we sing the four Stichira {“The rest of the assembly of the Jews ran forward,” “Judas, the transgressor, when at the supper he had dipped,” “Judas being a treacherous servant deceitfully” and “Judas, servant and traitor, disciple and plotter”}. Glory, Now and ever, “The Lamb whom Isaiah proclaimed goes of His own will.” The Small Doxology “To You glory belongs” (read). “Let us complete our morning prayer.” The four Aposticha: {“Today, the evil Sanhedrin has assembled against Christ.” The Verse “Who ate of my bread, has lifted his heel against me.” (Psalm 41:9); “Today Judas covers his face to love of the poor.” The Verse “When he goes out, he tells it abroad” (Psalm 41:6); “Your most deceitful way of life come to fulfillment.” The Verse “They denounced a wicked word against me” (Psalm 41:8); “O you faithful, let no man attend the Lord’s Supper.”} Glory, “Your most deceitful way of life,” Now and ever, “Initiating Your disciples, {You, O Christ.}” Then “It is a good thing to confess the Lord.” The Trisagion, the Troparion of the Prophecy, the Prophecy {Jeremiah 11:18-12:5}, Ektenis and Dismissal.
79.    In Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the five Idiomela of the Praises repeating the first one. Glory, Now and ever, “{Judas is truly} the offspring of asps.” The Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome Light,” and the Readings {Exodus 19:10-19; Job

*(Printed Page 755)*
