=== LEAF p361 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. Euthymios the Great; St. Gregory the Theologian (§ 1 – § 2 incipit) (p. 346)]

346

καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημ. ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων τούτων δυνατὸν νὰ συμπέσῃ
ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου, μέχρι
τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Ἀσώτου (Ὅρα τὸν τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακα).

Τῇ Κ΄.        Μνήμη τοῦ Ὁσίου πατρὸς ἡμῶν Εὐθυμίου τοῦ
Μεγάλου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ὁσίου ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς,
ἢ ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ ἢ ἄνευ Τριῳδίου, τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας
ὅρα ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀντωνίου § 1, 6.

    Σημ. Ἀξιοσημείωτός ἐστιν ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ εἰς τὸν
ἅγιον Εὐθύμιον α΄ Κανόνος, ποιηθέντος ὑπὸ Ἰωάννου τοῦ Δαμασκηνοῦ·
διότι τούτου τοῦ Εἱρμοῦ ἡ ἀρχὴ ἐν ταῖς μεταγενεστέραις ἐκδόσεσι
πανταχοῦ ἀπαντᾶται οὕτω· Παῖδας εὐαγεῖς ἐν τῇ καμίνῳ, ἐν δὲ τῷ
Κανόνι τούτῳ ἡ Ἀκροστιχὶς τοῦ Κανόνος Ὄλβος πέφηνας γηγενῶν
Εὐθύμιε ἀπαιτεῖ τὸν τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς Εἱρμὸν ἄρχεσθαι ἀπὸ τοῦ Υ καὶ ἐν
τοῖς κατὰ τὸ ,αφλγ΄ ἔτος ἐν Βενετίᾳ ἐκδοθεῖσι Μηναίοις ὑπὸ Στεφάνου
Σαβίου, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς ἄρχεται ἀπὸ τοῦ Υ οὕτως Υἱοὺς τῆς
Σιὼν ἐν τῇ καμίνῳ συμφώνως πρὸς τὴν Ἀκροστιχίδα, ἐξ οὗ δῆλον ὅτι
αὕτη ἦν ἴσως ἡ ἀρχαία καὶ γνησία τοῦ Εἱρμοῦ τούτου ἀρχή· (Γνώμη
τοῦ ἀοιδίμου Πατριάρχου Κωνσταντινουπόλεως Κωνσταντίου τοῦ Α΄).

Τῇ ΚΕ΄.        Τοῦ ἐν Ἁγίοις πατρὸς ἡμῶν Γρηγορίου τοῦ
Θεολόγου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς,
ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν,
ἐξαιρουμένων τῶν δευτέρων ἑσπερίων Στιχηρῶν, δι’ ἃ ὅρα τὴν ἐν τῷ
Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ ἁγίου Νικολάου ὑποσημείωσιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ ἄνευ Τριῳδίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ
τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα, Ἡ
γρήγορος γλῶσσά σου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου.
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς
τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Τὰς
καρδίας τῶν πιστῶν, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε.

*(Printed Page 346)*

=== LEAF p362 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. Euthymios the Great; St. Gregory the Theologian (§ 1 – § 2 incipit) (p. 347)]

347

    Note that the commemoration of these Saints {Our Holy Fathers the
Great Athanasios and Cyril, Patriarchs of Alexandria}, may occur from the
Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee until the Sunday of the Prodigal
Son. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

The 20th - Commemoration of our Righteous Father Efthymios
the Great.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day except
Sunday, or on a Sunday within or outside the Triodion period, the Service
is sung according to the Sunday order of the Feast of Saint Anthony, see
Paragraphs 1 - 6.
    Note: The Irmos of the 8th Ode of the First Canon of Saint
Efthymios, composed by Saint John of Damascus, is worthy of note since
the beginning of this Irmos in the earlier editions always began thus:
“Παῖδας εὐαγεῖς ἐν τῇ καμίνῳ”; however, in this Canon the Acrostic of
the Canon “Ὄλβος πέφηνας γηγενῶν Εὐθύμιε” requires that the Irmos
of the 8th Ode begin with the letter “Υ,” and, in the Mineon published in
Venice in 1533 by Stephanos Savios, the Irmos of the 9th Ode does begin
with an “Υ” thus: “Υἱοὺς τῆς Σιὼν ἐν τῇ καμίνῳ” in accordance with the
Acrostic. From this, one can say that this is perhaps the ancient and genuine
beginning of this Irmos (opinion of the ever-memorable Patriarch of
Constantinople Constantios the First).

The 25th.    Our Father among the Saints Gregory the Theolo-
gian.

1.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on any day except Sunday, his
Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon, with the exception of
the second set of Stichira Prosomia, concerning which see Note One in the
Vespers of Saint Nicholas.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday outside the Triodion period, in
Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the
Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and
4 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint “Your quick tongue,” Now and ever the
first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon
and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the
Saint “The hearts of the faithful,” Now and ever, “Unwedded Virgin.” The

*(Printed Page 347)*

=== LEAF p363 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. Gregory the Theologian (§ 2 concl. – § 6 incipit) (p. 348)]

348

ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου Ὁ ποιμενικὸς αὐλός,
Θεοτοκίον Τοῦ Γαβριὴλ φθεγξαμένου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ
Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ τὸ τῆς γ΄
Στιχολογίας Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια,
ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ
Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ
Θεοτοκίον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ
Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ
τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν
τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ
τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη. Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ α΄ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ
Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου
καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

5.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ Τριῳδίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας,
μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ α΄ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
δ΄ (τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄), Δόξα
τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν,
τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ
ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

6.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ Τριῳδίου (ἐὰν
ᾖ ἡ Κυριακὴ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω) εἰδὲ μή, Καὶ νῦν τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Τριαδικὰ
Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν

*(Printed Page 348)*

=== LEAF p364 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. Gregory the Theologian (§ 2 concl. – § 6 incipit) (p. 349)]

349

Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Saint “The pastoral flute,” the
Theotokion “At the sound of Gabriel's voice,” and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Saint and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion
of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as
in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata
in order, and in the 3rd Stasis that of the Saint with the Theotokion; the
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon.
The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the
Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos, then the Kathisma of the Saint and the
Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, and the
Minologion. The Katavasie “The sun once shone,” and the entire order of
the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” The Exapostilaria:
of the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saint. Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever,
“Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns
from the 6th Ode of the First Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and of the Saint of the Church,
Kontakion “You who have sanctified by Your birth a virgin womb.”
Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is
meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise [the Lord]” “We have seen the [true]
light,” and Dismissal.
5.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on a Sunday of the Triodion period,
on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the First
Kathisma of the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the
Resurrection, 2 of the Triodion and 4 of the Saint, (on the Sunday of
Meatfare: 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Saint), Glory of the Triodion, Now
and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,”
the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Triodion. The
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion, and Dis-
missal.
6.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of
the Saint, Glory of the Saint Now and ever of the Triodion (if the Feast falls
on Meatfare Sunday); if not, Now and ever the Theotokion, and the Triadic
“It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the
Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the
Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, in the 3rd

*(Printed Page 349)*

=== LEAF p365 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. Gregory the Theologian (§ 6 concl. – § 7; Patriarchal Decrees incipit) (p. 350)]

350

Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, καὶ τὸ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας Κάθισμα τοῦ
Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος,
ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον·
ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τοῦ Ἁγίου
καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς· αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον
καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ
Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια
τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ γ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄. (Τῇ
Κυριακῇ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
γ΄). Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη. Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
7.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ
Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου
καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν,
Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημ. Ὅτι ἐν πάσαις ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ (ἐκτὸς τῶν
Δεσποτικῶν καὶ Θεομητορικῶν ἑορτῶν, τῶν Κυριακῶν τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ
τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου, ἔτι δὲ καὶ τοῦ τιμίου Προδρόμου, τῶν κατὰ τὴν
ΚΘ΄ Ἰουνίου Πρωτοκορυφαίων Ἀποστόλων καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων
κατὰ Ἰούλιον καὶ Ὀκτώβριον) τυπικῷ κανόνι καθώρισται τὸ ψάλλειν
εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, πᾶσι τοῖς ἐκκλησιαστικοῖς τοῦτο
δῆλον. Ἐπειδὴ δὲ καὶ ἡ μνήμη τῶν θείων Πατέρων Γρηγορίου τοῦ
Θεολόγου καὶ Ἰωάννου τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου συμπίπτει καὶ Κυριακῇ, ὡς
ὄφλημα δίκαιον καὶ πρέπον λελόγισται πρὸς τηλικούτους ἱεροὺς
ἄνδρας, τοὺς πάσῃ σοφίᾳ, ἀρετῇ καὶ χάριτι τῇ ποιμαντικῇ διαπρέψαντας
ἐπιστασίᾳ καὶ πόνοις μεγάλοις τὸ τῆς Βυζαντίου Ἐκκλησίας
ἰθύναντας πνευματικὸν σκάφος, οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ δι’ ὧν κατέλιπον
πανσόφων, μελιῤῥύτων καὶ ἀθανάτων συγγραμμάτων, τὴν Οἰκουμενικὴν
μίαν, καὶ ἁγίαν Ἐκκλησίαν φαιδρύναντας, προσῆκον φαμεν οἰκεῖον,
καὶ παντὶ λόγῳ δικαίου ἐποφειλόμενον ἤγηται, ἐπὶ συμπτώσει τῆς
σεπτῆς αὐτῶν μνήμης ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ ἀντὶ τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ, Δόξα, εἰς

[Footnote on p. 350:]
3  Ἀλλ’ ὅταν ἡ μνήμη αὐτῶν συμπέσῃ Κυριακῇ ἐντὸς τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τότε Δόξα τῶν Αἴνων ψάλλεται τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου.

*(Printed Page 350)*

=== LEAF p366 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. Gregory the Theologian (§ 6 concl. – § 7; Patriarchal Decrees incipit) (p. 351)]

351

Stasis [Stichologia] that of the Saint with the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria,
the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons
of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the Saint and
the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion,
and the Minologion of the Saints of the day, and the Postscript of the Sunday.
The Katavasie “The sun once shone” and the entire order of the Morning
Gospel of Matins of the Triodion. Then we sing “More honorable.”
Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, and the Theotokion. At the
Praises: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Triodion and 3 of the Saint. (On
the Sunday of Meatfare: 3 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Triodion and 3 of
the Saint). Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great
Doxology and “Today salvation.”
7.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns
from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Triodion. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Saint and of the Saint of the Church,
Kontakion “You who have sanctified by Your birth a virgin womb.”
Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is
meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise [the Lord],” “We have seen the [true]
light,” and Dismissal.
    Note: In all the Sundays of the year (except: those of the Feasts of
the Lord or the Theotokos, the Sundays of the Triodion and the Pentikostarion,
and also those of the Precious Forerunner, the Chief Apostles [June 29] and
the Holy Fathers of July and October) the order of service of the Typikon
prescribes that at the Praises we sing Glory the Eothinon; this is evident to
all clergymen. Since, however, both the commemoration of the Holy
Fathers Gregory the Theologian and John Chrysostom may occur on a
Sunday, as a duty [literally “debt”] both good and proper and sensible
toward such great Holy Men, full of all wisdom, virtue and grace, excelling
in the pastoral supervision and guiding the spiritual ship of the Byzantine
Church with great pains, through which they left behind all-wise, honey-
flowing, and immortal writings, thus brightening with joy the one Ecumeni-
cal and Holy Church, we call it fitting and, led by all just reason that if their
august commemoration occurs on a Sunday, that instead of the Eothinon, we
sing the Glory of these Luminaries,³ and this certainly in the Great Church
on whose throne both Saints served. (Opinion of the revered Patriarch of
Constantinople Constantine the First, the Byzantine.)

3. However, when this commemoration falls on a Sunday within the Triodion period, then the
Glory of the Praises sung is that of the Triodion.

*(Printed Page 351)*

=== LEAF p367 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. Gregory concl. (§ 8); Translation of the Relics of St. John Chrysostom (§ 1 – § 2 incipit) (p. 352)]

352

τοὺς Αἴνους, ψάλλειν τὸ τῶν Φωστήρων αὐτῶν Δόξα, καὶ τοῦτο
μάλιστα ἐν τῇ Μεγάλῃ Ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἧς τὸν θρόνον ἀμφότεροι αὑτῶν
τῷ κλέει κατηύγασαν· (Γνώμη τοῦ ἀοιδίμου Πατριάρχου
Κωνσταντινουπόλεως Κωνσταντίνου Α΄ τοῦ Βυζαντίου).
8.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν ψυχῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου
προψάλλεται τῇ Παρασκευῇ, ἡ δὲ τῶν ψυχῶν ψάλλεται, ὡς εἴθισται,
ἐν τῷ Σαββάτῳ, μὴ μετατιθεμένη διὰ τὸ πένθιμον, ὡς διαλαμβάνουσι
καὶ τὰ ἀρχαῖα Τυπικά. (Αὕτη ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ γνώμη τῶν ἀοιδίμων
Πατριαρχῶν Κωνσταντίου τοῦ Α΄ καὶ Γρηγορίου τοῦ ς΄).
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου δύναται νὰ
συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ
Φαρισαίου, μέχρι τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Ἀπόκρεω. (Ὅρα τὸν τοῦ
Ἑορτοδρομίου Πίνακα).

Τῇ ΚΖ΄.        Ἡ ἀνακομιδὴ τοῦ Λειψάνου τοῦ ἐν ἁγίοις πατρὸς
ἡμῶν Ἰωάννου τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν
τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ Στιχηρὰ
Προσόμοια εἰς τὴν ς΄, Δόξα, Οὐκ ἔδει σε Χρυσόστομε, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ
διὰ σὲ θεοπάτωρ. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα· εἶτα τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα, Ὅσιε τρισμάκαρ, Καὶ νῦν,
Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος... μετὰ τοῦ Ἱεράρχου, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου
(ζήτει τῇ ΙΓ΄ τοῦ Νοεμβρίου), εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ
Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς,
καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ
Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου
καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον Τὸ στόμα μου λαλήσει σοφίαν, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ
καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ Ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα,
Σήμερον σκιρτῶσιν ἐν πνεύματι, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου...,
Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Σάλπιγξ χρυσόφωνος
ἀνεδείχθης. Κανόνες, ὁ τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ ὁ α΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου Πλοῦτον
ἐναπέθου σῇ ψυχῇ, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου [καὶ τὸ
Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον] (Σημ. Μεταφραστοῦ· ἡ φράσις ἐντὸς
παρενθέσεων ἔχει παραλειφθῆ ἕνεκα τυπογραφικοῦ λάθους) καὶ ὁ
Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον, εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον

*(Printed Page 352)*

=== LEAF p368 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. Gregory concl. (§ 8); Translation of the Relics of St. John Chrysostom (§ 1 – § 2 incipit) (p. 353)]

353

8.    If the Feast occurs on the Saturday of the Souls, the Service of the
Saint is sung in advance on Friday; that of the Souls is sung as is the custom
on Saturday, not having been moved on account of the mournfullness of the
event, as the ancient Typika also state. (This is the opinion of the revered
Patriarchs Constantios the First and Gregory the Sixth.)
    It is noteworthy that the commemoration of Saint Gregory may
occur within the Triodion period from the Sunday of the Publican and the
Pharisee until the Sunday of Meatfare. (See the Chart of Celebrations).

The 27th.    Transfer of the Remains of our Father among the
Saints John Chrysostom.

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the First Stasis of
the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 3 Stichira of the Saint (twice
each). Glory, “Nothing bound you, Chrysostom,” Now and ever, “Through
the Prophet David.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and
the Readings. Then the Aposticha; Glory, “Thrice-blessed Righteous
Saint,” Now and ever, “Theotokos, you are the true vine ... with the
Hierarch.” The Apolytikion of the Saint, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
2. At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint (see November 13th); then
the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At “God is
the Lord”: the Apolytikion twice and the Theotokion once, then the Psalter
and the Polyeleos, the Kathismata in order, the First Antiphon of the
Anavathmi of Mode IV and the Prokimenon: “My mouth shall proclaim
wisdom.” Then “Let all breath” and the Gospel of Matins, Psalm 50 (read),
Glory, “Today they leap in the Spirit” Now and ever, “Through the
intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “Have mercy on me” and the
Idiomelon “Golden-voiced trumpet.” The Canons of the Theotokos and the
first of the Saint “Riches you laid aside for your soul.” After the 3rd Ode,
the Kathisma of the Saint [and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion] {Translator's Note: this phrase in brackets has been omitted in
the Typikon} and Ikos of the Saint, and the Minologion of the Saints. The
Katavasie “The sun once shone,” then we sing “More honorable.” The
Exapostilarion and the Theotokion. At the Praises: the 4 Stichira of the Saint
{Translator's Note: the Typikon says “the 3 Prosomia in 4”; this could be

*(Printed Page 353)*

=== LEAF p369 ===
[Original Greek Text: St. John Chrysostom (§ 2 concl. – § 7; Patriarchal Custom) (p. 354)]

354

Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ τρία Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄ (Σημ. Μεταφραστοῦ·
τὸ Τυπικὸν πιθανὸν λανθάνει ἐφ’ ὅσον τὸ Μηναῖον ἔχει 4 Στιχηρά),
Δόξα, Πάτερ Χρυσόστομε, Καὶ νῦν, Ἐκ πάντων κινδύνων.
Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί,
Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ α΄ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Μετὰ
τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ
καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς
μνημόσυνον αἰώνιον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι, κατ’ ἔθος ἀρχαῖον, ἐν τῷ Πατριαρχικῷ ναῷ
κατὰ τὰς δύο τοῦ Ἱεροῦ Χρυσοστόμου ἑορτὰς ὁ Πατριάρχης
κατερχόμενος εἰς τὸν Ναὸν οὐχ ἵσταται ἐν τῷ Θρόνῳ ἀλλ’ ἐν τῷ
Παραθρονίῳ· ἐν δὲ τῷ Θρόνῳ τίθεται ἡ ἱερὰ Εἰκὼν τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου,
ὅπως ἀσπάζηται αὐτὴν ὁ λαός· ἵσταται δὲ ἐνώπιον τῆς ἱερᾶς Εἰκόνος
τὸ Πατριαρχικὸν Διβάμβουλον, ἤτοι τὸ μέγα κηροπήγιον, καῖον μέχρι
τέλους τῆς ἱερᾶς Λειτουργίας.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ ἄνευ Τριῳδίου, τὴν διάταξιν τῆς
Ἀκολουθίας ὅρα ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου § 2, 3, 4.

5.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ Τριῳδίου, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας,
μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ α΄ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου δύο καὶ τοῦ
Ἁγίου δ΄ (τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου
γ΄), Δόξα, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος,
Φῶς ἱλαρόν, Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τοῦ
Τριῳδίου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον,
καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
6.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον καὶ τὴν Λειτουργίαν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία
τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τῆς Ἀναστασίμου καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου ψάλλεται
ἀπαραλλάκτως κατὰ τὴν τυπικὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ ἁγίου
Γρηγορίου ἐν § 6, 7.
7.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ ψάλλεται
τῇ Παρασκευῇ, ἡ δὲ τῶν Ψυχῶν ψάλλεται, ὡς εἴθισται, τῷ Σαββάτῳ,
μὴ μετατιθεμένη, ὡς εἴρηται καὶ ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τοῦ ἁγίου Γρηγορίου
ἐν § 8.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου δυνατὸν νὰ
συμπέσῃ ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου

*(Printed Page 354)*

=== LEAF p370 ===
[English Facing Translation: St. John Chrysostom (§ 2 concl. – § 7; Patriarchal Custom) (p. 355)]

355

an error since the Mineon has four Stichira}. Glory, “Father Chrysostom,”
Now and ever, “From all dangers,” Great Doxology and Apolytikion of the
Saint.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and Beatitudes, and hymns from the 3rd
and 6th Ode of the First Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikion of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion
“You who have sanctified by Your birth a virgin womb.” Apostolos and
Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “The
righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance,” “We have seen the [true]
light,” and Dismissal.
    It should be noted that according to ancient custom and practice, in
the Patriarchal Church, on the two Feasts of Saint John Chrysostom [i.e.
today and November 13], when the Patriarch comes down to the Church, he
does not stand at the Throne, but at the Para-throne [smaller throne nearby];
on the Throne is placed the Holy Icon of Chrysostom, which the faithful
venerate [kiss]; there is also placed before the Holy Icon the Patriarchal
Two-wicked Candle; i.e., the Great Candelabra, which burns until the end
of the Liturgy.
4.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on a Sunday outside the
Triodion period, the Service is sung according to the order of the Feast of
Saint Gregory, Paragraphs 2, 3, 4.
5.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday within the Triodion period, in
Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the
First Stasis of the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the
Resurrection, 2 of the Triodion and 4 of the Saint (on the Sunday of
Meatfare: 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Saint). Glory of the Triodion, Now
and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,”
the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Triodion. The
Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
6.    On Sunday at Matins and the Liturgy, the Service of the Saint
together with that of the Sunday Resurrection hymns and of the Triodion are
sung according to the order of the service of Saint Gregory, Paragraphs 6,
7.
7.    If the Feast occurs on the Saturday of the Souls, the Service of the
Saint is sung [in advance] on Friday; that of the Souls is sung, as is the
custom, on Saturday, without being moved, as indicated in Paragraph 8 of
the Feast of Saint Gregory.
    It is noteworthy that the commemoration of Chrysostom may occur
from the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee until the Tuesday of

*(Printed Page 355)*
