=== LEAF p211 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — October 18: St. Luke Concl. / October 20: St. Artemios, St. Matrona of Chios, St. Gerasimos (p. 196)]

196

Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, Σήμερον σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ κανόνος τοῦ Ἀποστόλου ἄλλα δ΄, Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Κ΄.        Τοῦ ἁγίου Μεγαλομάρτυρος Ἀρτεμίου, τῆς ὁσίας Ματρώνης τῆς Χιοπολίτιδος καὶ τοῦ ὁσίου Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Γερασίμου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ προηγοῦνται τὰ πρῶτα γ΄ Στιχηρὰ τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀρτεμίου, εἶτα ὅπου μὲν ἑορτάζεται ἡ ἁγία Ματρῶνα ἕπονται τὰ γ΄ αὐτῆς Στιχηρά, ὅπου δὲ ὁ ἅγιος Γεράσιμος, ἕπονται τὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου τούτου· ἐννοεῖται ὅτι πάντα τὰ Δοξαστικὰ λέγονται ἐκ τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου ἢ τῆς Ἁγίας. Τὰς ἰδιαιτέρας δὲ Ἀκολουθίας αὐτῶν ὅρα εἰς τὰς ἰδιαιτέρας φυλλάδας, καὶ τὴν τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀρτεμίου ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀρτεμίου γ΄ καὶ τῆς ὁσίας Ματρώνης (ἢ τοῦ ὁσίου Γερασίμου) γ΄. Δόξα τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου), Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου). Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου), Καὶ νῦν Θεοτοκίον ἐκ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου. Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀρτεμίου, τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου), Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου), τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ ἑορταζομένου Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν καὶ τὸ τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας Κάθισμα τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου), μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου. Τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου). Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀρτεμίου, τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου) καὶ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν

*(Printed Page 196)*

=== LEAF p212 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — October 18: St. Luke Concl. / October 20: St. Artemios, St. Matrona of Chios, St. Gerasimos (p. 197)]

197

hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Apostle. Apostolos and Gospel of the Evangelist, Communion Hymn "To all the earth," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 20th.    The Holy Great-martyr Artemios, the Righteous Matrona of Chiopolis and our Righteous Father Gerasimos.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day except Sunday, in Vespers, the first 3 Stichira of Saint Artemios come first; then, wherever Saint Matrona is celebrated, 3 of her Stichira follow; wherever Saint Gerasimos is celebrated, 3 of his Stichira follow instead. It is understood that all the Doxastika [Glory Hymns] are those of the celebrated male Saint or female Saint. The individual Service of both Saints Matrona and Gerasimos may be found in special booklets, and that of Saint Artemios in the Mineon.
2.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers, on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 3 Stichira of Saint Artemios, and 3 of the Righteous Matrona (or of the Righteous Gerasimos); Glory of Matrona (or Gerasimos), Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon, and the Readings of Matrona (or Gerasimos). At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of Matrona (or Gerasimos), Now and ever the Theotokion of the Octoichos. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of Saint Artemios, of Matrona (or Gerasimos), the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Liti of Matrona (or Gerasimos), and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the celebrating Saint and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, and in the 3rd Stichologia the Kathisma of Matrona (or Gerasimos), with the Theotokion. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of Matrona (or Gerasimos). After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of Saint Artemios and of Matrona (or Gerasimos) and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie "I shall open my

*(Printed Page 197)*

=== LEAF p213 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — October 20: St. Artemios, St. Matrona, St. Gerasimos Concl. / October 23: St. James Brother of the Lord (p. 198)]

198

Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀρτεμίου, τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου), καὶ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου) δ΄. Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη· Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου). Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀρτεμίου, τὸ τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου), τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν. Ἀπόστολος τῆς Ὁσίας (ἢ τοῦ Ὁσίου) καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΚΓ΄.        Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀποστόλου Ἰακώβου τοῦ Ἀδελφοθέου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἀποστόλου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστὶ διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου δ΄. Δόξα Αἵματι τοῦ μαρτυρίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Τοῦ Ἀρχιποίμενος Χριστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε, Ἀπολυτίκια Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ ἁγίου Ὡς τοῦ Κυρίου μαθητής, Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος

*(Printed Page 198)*

=== LEAF p214 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — October 20: St. Artemios, St. Matrona, St. Gerasimos Concl. / October 23: St. James Brother of the Lord (p. 199)]

199

mouth," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of Saint Artemios and of Matrona (or Gerasimos) and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of Matrona (or Gerasimos). Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of Matrona (or Gerasimos). After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of Saint Artemios, that of Matrona (or Gerasimos), that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "Protection of all Christians." Apostolos of Matrona (or Gerasimos) and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 23rd.    The Holy Apostle Iakovos [James] Brother of the Lord.

1.    If the commemoration of the Apostle occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers, on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 Stichira of the Apostle. Glory, "With the blood of martyrdom," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon, and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "Of the Chief-shepherd Christ," Now and ever, "O Virgin unwedded." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint "As a disciple of the Lord," the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Apostle and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Amomos, the Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode the Kontakion and the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning

*(Printed Page 199)*

=== LEAF p215 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — October 23: St. James Concl. / October 26: St. Demetrios & Great Earthquake (p. 200)]

200

τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἄλλα δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΚΣΤ΄.        Τοῦ ἁγίου Μεγαλομάρτυρος Δημητρίου τοῦ Μυροβλήτου.        [Ἀνάμνησις τοῦ Μεγάλου Σεισμοῦ ἐν Κωνσταντινουπόλει τὸ 791 ἔτος]

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ κατὰ σειρὰν ς΄ Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα Σήμερον συγκαλεῖται ἡμᾶς, Καὶ νῦν Παναγία Δέσποινα. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τοῦ Σεισμοῦ, Δόξα Ἔχει μὲν ἡ θειοτάτη σου ψυχή, Καὶ νῦν Δέσποινα πρόσδεξαι, Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, Μέγαν εὕρατο καὶ τοῦ Σεισμοῦ, Ὁ ἐπιβλέπων ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ἀντὶ τοῦ θεοτοκίου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου δίς, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου δίς, Καὶ νῦν Τὸ τοῦ Σεισμοῦ, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Θαυμαστὸς ὁ θεὸς ἐν τοῖς Ἁγίοις αὐτοῦ, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, χῦμα, Δόξα Ταῖς τοῦ Ἀθλοφόρου, Καὶ νῦν Ταῖς τῆς θεοτόκου, Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Εἰς τὰ ὑπερκόσμια σκηνώματα (Ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν). Κανόνες ὁ τοῦ Σεισμοῦ, οὗ ὁ Στίχος, Δόξα σοι ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου Μερὶς μου Δημήτριε· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τοῦ Σεισμοῦ ἀντὶ θεοτοκίου. Ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ

*(Printed Page 200)*

=== LEAF p216 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — October 23: St. James Concl. / October 26: St. Demetrios & Great Earthquake (p. 201)]

201

Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Saint, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Apostle, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "Protection of all Christians." Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 26th    The Holy Great-martyr Dimitrios the Myrovliti. [Commemoration of the Great Earthquake in Constantinople in the year 791]

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Saint in order, Glory, "Today the general assembly calls us," Now and ever, "We implore you, O all-holy Lady." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Stichira of the Earthquake, Glory, "Your divine and blameless soul," Now and ever, "O Lady receive." The Apolytikion of the Saint "Great the universe found you" and that of the Earthquake "You who does look upon the earth" instead of the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
2.    In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion of the Saint twice, Now and ever that of the Earthquake, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon Mode IV, and the Prokimenon "Wonderful is God in His saints." Then, "Let everything that has breath" and the [Morning] Gospel, Psalm 50 read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of the fight-bearing one," Now and ever, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "O merciful One," and the Idiomelon "In the otherworldly dwellings," (look in the Liti). The Canons of the Earthquake, with the Verse "Glory to You, our God, glory to You" and the second Canon of the Saint "My portion, Demetrios." After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint, and

*(Printed Page 201)*

=== LEAF p217 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — October 26: St. Demetrios & Great Earthquake Cont. (p. 202)]

202

Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄ τῶν Αἴνων Προσόμοια Δεῦρο μάρτυς Χριστοῦ πρὸς ἡμᾶς. Δόξα Τὸν λόγχαις κληρωσάμενον Καὶ νῦν Ῥῦσαι ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῶν ἀναγκῶν ἡμῶν, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, ἐκ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Σεισμοῦ δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Σεισμοῦ, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου ἐν Σαββάτῳ, τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Νέστορος δ΄. Δόξα, Σήμερον συγκαλεῖται ἡμᾶς, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Ἔχει μὲν ἡ θειοτάτη σου ψυχή, Καὶ νῦν Ἀνύμφευτε Παρθένε, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου Μέγαν εὕρατο, τὸ θεοτοκίον Σὲ τὴν μεσιτεύσασαν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τὸ πρωῒ εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν· οἱ Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ πρῶτος τοῦ ἁγίου Δημητρίου Τὸν θεῖον τοῦ μαρτυρίου στέφανον· μετὰ τοὺς Κανόνας ἡ Ἀκολουθία ἅπασα τῆς Κυριακῆς μόνη.
6.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου ς΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν Παναγία Δέσποινα, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ Σεισμοῦ ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
7.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα, ἓν Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ ἓν τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου ἐν τῇ α΄ καὶ β΄ στιχολογίᾳ, ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ τὰ τοῦ

*(Printed Page 202)*

=== LEAF p218 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — October 26: St. Demetrios & Great Earthquake Cont. (p. 203)]

203

of the Earthquake instead of a Theotokion. After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilarion of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Prosomia of the Saint "Hasten to us, O Saint of Christ." Glory, "Fallen upon by spears," Now and ever, "Spare us from our needs," Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saint.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the 3rd Ode of the Canon of the Earthquake and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the second Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Earthquake, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "Protection of all Christians." Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "The just shall be in everlasting remembrance," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
4.    If the Saint's Feast occurs on a Saturday, in Vespers, on this Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 Stichira of Saint Nestor. Glory, "Today the general assembly calls us," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "Your divine and blameless soul," Now and ever, "O Virgin unwedded." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint "Great the universe found you," the Theotokion "You the intercessor," and Dismissal.
5.    In the morning, at "God is the Lord," the Apolytikia as in Vespers; the Canons of the Resurrection and the first of Saint Dimitrios "The divine crown of your martyrdom"; after the Canons we perform only the entire Service of the Sunday.
6.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers, on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 Stichira of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, "O All-holy Lady." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, of the Earthquake instead of the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
7.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Saint and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata, one of the Resurrection and one of the Saint with the Theotokion in the first and second Stichologie [Sections], and in the third Stichologia those of the Saint. The

*(Printed Page 203)*

=== LEAF p219 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — October 26: St. Demetrios & Great Earthquake Concl. / November 1: Unmercenaries Cosmas & Damian (p. 204)]

204

Ἁγίου, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Σεισμοῦ καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τοῦ Σεισμοῦ Τῆς ἐπελθούσης σου ὀργῆς ἀφορήτου, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Τὸν λόγχαις κληρωσάμενον 1 Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
8.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Σεισμοῦ, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν. Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΜΗΝ ΝΟΕΜΒΡΙΟΣ

Τῇ Α΄. Τῶν ἁγίων Ἀναργύρων Κοσμᾶ καὶ Δαμιανοῦ.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτῶν ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄. Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ

1. Ἐν τῷ κατὰ τὸ ,αωνα΄ ἐκδεδομένῳ Τυπικῷ τοῦ Κωνσταντίνου, φαίνεται ἐνταῦθα σημείωσις διορθοῦσα τὴν περὶ τὸ τέλος τοῦ Δοξαστικοῦ τούτου περίοδον «τὸν ἐν πολλοῖς καὶ πολλάκις κινδύνοις χαλεποῖς τῶν Θεσσαλονικέων προϊστάμενον» ὧδε «τὸν ἐν πολλοῖς καὶ... χαλεποῖς πᾶσι τοῖς εὐσεβέσι προϊστάμενον»· ἀλλ' ἐπειδὴ οὔτε εὐοδοῦται γραμματικῶς αὕτη ἡ διόρθωσις, οὔτε ἐπιδοκιμάζεται τὸ μετατρέπειν κατὰ τὸ δοκοῦν τὰ Τροπάρια, ἐν οἷς μάλιστα γίνεται μνεία ἱστορικῶν ἐχόντων σημασίαν, διὰ ταῦτα συνιστᾶται τῷ ψάλλοντι, ἵνα τηρῇ ἐν πάσῃ ἀκριβείᾳ τὸ κείμενον ὡς εὕρηται.

*(Printed Page 204)*

=== LEAF p220 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — October 26: St. Demetrios & Great Earthquake Concl. / November 1: Unmercenaries Cosmas & Damian (p. 205)]

205

Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Earthquake and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos (read), then the Kathisma of the Saint and of the Earthquake "Release us from your coming unbearable wrath"; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Saint, Glory, "Fallen upon by spears" 1, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
8.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Earthquake, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "Protection of all Christians." Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light" and Dismissal.

MONTH OF NOVEMBER

The 1st.    The Unmercenary Saints Cosmas and Damian.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day except Sunday, their Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saints. Glory of the Saints,

1. In the Typikon of Constantine published in 1851, a note appears here correcting the ending of the Doxastikon "the pitying leader of the people of Thessalonica, and their champion in many severe hardships," as "the pitying leader of all the pious, and their champion in many... severe hardships." But because this correction does not proceed properly in grammatical terms, nor is it approved to alter, as one wishes, the Hymns—especially those in which there is mention of historically significant events—it is suggested to the chanter that he preserve in all accuracy the text as it was found originally.

*(Printed Page 205)*
