=== LEAF p461 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation III Cont. (§§ 13–16) (p. 446)]

446

Πνεύματος, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας· ἀφ᾿ θ΄ (η΄)* ψάλλεται
τῆς η΄ (θ΄)* Ὠδῆς ὁ Εἱρμός, καὶ μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ
Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ὡς δῶρα προεόρτια δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
τὰ ἑσπέρια τοῦ μικροῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ Κατοικτιρήσας τὸ ποίημα
ὁ πλάστης (ψαλλόμενα εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα)· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Τῷ ἕκτῳ μηνί, Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Ἐκτενῆ τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ μικροῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ Ἄρχων τῶν ἄνω δυνάμεων,
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ ἔγνω, τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ
ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, τὸ Τρισάγιον, καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.

14.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ τῆς ἡμέρας Ἀντίφωνα· εἰς τὴν
Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . Ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, τὸ
προεόρτιον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ προεόρτιον
Κοντάκιον· Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Ἄξιόν
ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἡμέρας, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
15.    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ
Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ γ΄, τοῦ
Σταυροῦ γ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Βουλὴν προαιώνιον εἰς δ΄, Δόξα, Χριστὲ
ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν (τοῦ Τριῳδίου), Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ Οὐρανοῦ.
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς
ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Ὁ
συμμαχήσας Κύριε, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς Εὐαγγέλια, Ἀπολυτίκια
τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Σταυροῦ, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

16.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, καὶ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ψάλλεται ἡ Λιτὴ (καταλιμπανομένου
τοῦ Τριαδικοῦ κανόνος), Δόξα, ἐκ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ τῆς
ἑορτῆς· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν
Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τῆς ἑορτῆς.
Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίαν, Ἀναστάσιμα δύο καὶ τὸ
τῆς ἑορτῆς· εἰς δὲ τὴν γ΄ τὸ τοῦ Σταυροῦ καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς·
ἡ Αἴτησις, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον
τῆς ἑορτῆς Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ
καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ
καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ αὐτό,
ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Εὐαγγελίζεται
ὁ Γαβριήλ. Κανόνες ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, οὗ πρῶτον ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς
Ὁ θειότατος δίς, εἰς τὸ δεύτερον Τροπάριον Στίχος· Δόξα τῇ

*(Printed Page 446)*

=== LEAF p462 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Three Cont. (§§ 13–16) (p. 447)]

447

the Kathisma of the Pre-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion "Through the descent of the holy Spirit" and the Minologion of the day; after the 8th {9th}* Ode and "More honorable," the Irmos of the 9th {8th}* Ode is chanted; the Exapostilarion of the Pre-feast "As pre-festal gifts" (twice). At the Praises: the hymns of the Small Vespers "Having great pity upon Your creation" {sung at Lord I have cried}, Glory, Now and ever, "The sixth month" the Lesser Doxology "To You belongs glory"; and after the petitions, the Aposticha of the Small Vespers "Magistrate of the powers above," Glory, Now and ever, "The language that I knew not"; then "It is good to give thanks," Trisagion, and the Apolytikion.
14.    At the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the day; at the Entrance, "Come let us worship... who is wondrous in Your Saints," the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast, the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion of the Pre-feast, Apostolos and Gospel of the day. "It is meet," Communion Hymn of the day, "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
15.    Saturday evening at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the reading from the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant 3 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Cross and 4 of the Feast "The pre-eternal Will." Glory, "O Christ our God" {of the Triodion}, Now and ever of the Feast "Sent from heaven." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Feast. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "O Lord the ally," Now and ever, "Today is the announcement of joy." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Cross, of the Feast and Dismissal.
16.    Sunday at Matins, after "Blessed is our God," the Trisagion and Psalm 50; the Liti is chanted (omitting the Triadic Canon). Glory from the Triodion, Now and ever of the Feast, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter of the day, and the Polyeleos of the Feast. The Kathismata at the 1st and 2nd Stasis [Stichologie], 2 of the Resurrection and one of the Feast; at the 3rd Stasis, that of the Cross and those of the Feast; the Petition, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon of the Feast "Proclaim His salvation from day to day." Then "Let everything that has breath" and the Gospel "In those days Mary arose." The "Having beheld the Resurrection," Psalm 50 read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," Now and ever repeat the same. The Verse "O God, have mercy on me" and the Idiomelon "Today Gabriel announces." Canons of the Triodion, at which first is chanted the Irmos "Moses the servant of God" (twice) at the 2nd hymn "Glory to Your

*(Printed Page 447)*

=== LEAF p463 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation III Concl. (§§ 16–18); Situation IV (§ 19) (p. 448)]

448

ἁγίᾳ ἀναστάσει σου, εἰς δὲ τὰ λοιπὰ Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν
καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, μετὰ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸν Οἶκον
τοῦ Τριῳδίου ψάλλεται τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Σταυροῦ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς·
ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ
Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ὁ θειότατος
προετύπωσε, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ
χαρὰν . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ Θεοῦ, ἡ Καταβασία Ὦ Μῆτερ Παρθένε,
Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Σταυροῦ καὶ τὸ τῆς
ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τοῦ Σταυροῦ γ΄, καὶ τῆς
ἑορτῆς γ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Δοξολογία
Μ. Κατὰ δὲ τὸ Τρισάγιον τῆς Δοξολογίας τελεῖται ἡ τάξις τῆς
Εἰσόδου τοῦ Τιμίου Σταυροῦ, ὡς εἴθισται· μετὰ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον
Δεῦτε πιστοί, λέγεται τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
17.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς (Ὅρα ἐν
περιπτώσει Α΄ § 5)· εἰς τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθείς,
Εἰσοδικὸν Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας . . . Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . .
ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Σταυροῦ, τὸ
τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου Τὸν
σταυρόν σου προσκυνοῦμεν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τῆς Κυριακῆς καὶ τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ χαρὰν
μεγάλην . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ Θεοῦ, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐξελέξατο Κύριος τὴν
Σιών, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

18.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια Βουλὴν προαιώνιον, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου
Γαβριὴλ ὁ μέγιστος ὁ νοῦς, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ
οὐρανοῦ. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας.
Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Τῷ ἕκτῳ μηνί. Δόξα, Καὶ
νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον τῆς
σωτηρίας ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Δ΄.

19.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Δ΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῷ Σαββάτῳ

*(Printed Page 448)*

=== LEAF p464 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Three Concl. (§§ 16–18); Situation Four (§ 19) (p. 449)]

449

Resurrection," at the rest "Glory to You our God" and that of the Feast. At the 3rd Ode, after the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, the Kathisma of the Cross and of the Feast are chanted; at the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "Moses the servant of God," then the 9th Ode of the Feast "O Earth announce great tidings of joy . . . As a live ark of God," and the Katavasia "O Virgin Mother." Exapostilaria of the Resurrection, of the Cross and of the Feast. At the Praises: 2 of the Resurrection, 3 of the Cross and 3 of the Feast, Glory, Now and ever, "The mystery before all time," and the Great Doxology. During the Trisagion of the Doxology, the Procession with the Precious Cross is done as customary; following the Idiomelon "Come, all faithful," we sing "Today salvation."
17.    At the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast (See Situation One, Paragraph 5); at the 2nd Antiphon "Incarnate for our sake." Entrance Hymn "Proclaim His salvation from day to day . . . Save us . . . who is risen from the dead." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Cross, of the Feast and the Kontakion "To the Champion General." Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, we chant "We venerate Your Cross." The Apostolos of the Sunday [Hebrews 4:14 - 5:6] the Gospel "In those days Elizabeth conceived" (Luke 1:24-38). At "Especially," "O Earth, announce good tidings of great joy . . . As a live ark of God." Communion Hymn "The Lord has chosen Zion; He wants to make it his home," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal.

The Leave-taking

18.    That Sunday evening, following the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord I have cried" we chant the 3 Prosomia of the Feast "The pre-eternal will" and the 3 of the Archangel Gabriel (see the 26th of this month); Glory, Now and ever, "Sent from heaven." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela "In the sixth month," Glory, Now and ever, "Today is the announcement of joy." The Apolytikion "Today marks the crowning of our salvation" (3 times) and Dismissal.

SITUATION FOUR

19.    If the Feast occurs on Monday of the 4th Week, on Saturday

*(Printed Page 449)*

=== LEAF p465 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation IV Concl. (§ 19); Situation V (§ 20); Situation VI (§ 21) (p. 450)]

450

ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Κυριακῇ τὸ πρωῒ ἡ προεόρτιος Ἀκολουθία
καταλιμπάνεται, ψάλλεται δὲ μόνη ἡ τῆς Σταυροπροσκυνήσεως
Ἀκολουθία μετὰ τῶν Ἀναστασίμων, ὡς τέτακται ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ.

    Τῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ πρωῒ ἡ τῆς ἑορτῆς
Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.
    Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῇ αὐτῇ Δευτέρᾳ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται ὡς διετάχθη
ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 18.

Ε΄.

20.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Τρίτῃ τῆς Δ΄, Ε΄ καὶ ΣΤ΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ
Κυριακῇ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα τὰ δ΄ τοῦ ἤχου κατανυκτικά, τοῦ Τριῳδίου Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ
τὰ γ΄ προεόρτια Κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Μέγα
Προκείμενον, μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ
Ἰδιόμελον δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ (ἐκ τοῦ Τριῳδίου), Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Γλῶσσαν ἣν οὐκ ἔγνω, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον,
τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε, τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὴν
τιμιωτέραν τῶν Χερουβίμ, τὸ Ἐπουράνιε Βασιλεῦ, τὰς
Μετανοίας (ὑπονοεῖται ἡ Προσευχὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἐφραίμ), τὴν
Συγχώρησιν, ὡς εἴθισται (πιθανὸν λάθος, διότι τὸ Τυπικὸν τοῦ Τριῳ-
δίου δίχνει ὅτι ἡ Συγχώρησις γίνεται μόνον εἰς τὴν παραμονὴν
τῆς Μεγάλης Τεσσαρακοστῆς, δηλ. εἰς τὸν ἑσπερινὸν τὸ ἑσπέρας
τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Τυροφάγου), καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς Παραμονῆς καὶ αἱ Ὧραι ψάλλονται
ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2. Μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας
Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ ἑσπέρας ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ τῇ Τρίτῃ ὁ Ὄρθρος
τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου ψάλλονται ὡς
διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.
    Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῇ αὐτῇ Τρίτῃ ἑσπέρας γίνεται ὡς διετάχθη
ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 18.

ΣΤ΄.

21.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Τετάρτῃ ἢ τῇ Πέμπτῃ τῆς Δ΄ καὶ ΣΤ΄
ἑβδομάδος, ὁ μὲν προεόρτιος Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ ἐν ταῖς δυσὶ ταύταις
περιστάσεσι ψάλλεται ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Β΄ § 9. Ὁ τῆς
Παραμονῆς Ὄρθρος μετὰ τῶν Ὡρῶν ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄

*(Printed Page 450)*

=== LEAF p466 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Four Concl. (§ 19); Situation Five (§ 20); Situation Six (§ 21) (p. 451)]

451

evening and Sunday morning the Service of the Pre-feast is omitted; only the Service of the Veneration of the Cross is chanted together with the Resurrection hymns as prescribed in the Triodion.
    On Sunday evening and Monday morning the Service of the Feast is chanted as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3 - 5.
    The Leave-taking on that Monday evening is chanted as prescribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 18.

SITUATION FIVE

20.    If the Feast occurs on Tuesday of the 4th, 5th or 6th Week, on Sunday evening at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant the 4 Penitential Hymns of the Mode, 3 Prosomia of the Triodion, and 3 of the Pre-feast "Hidden mystery." Glory, Now and ever, "Gabriel announces." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Great Prokimenon with its verses. At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon (twice) and the Martyrikon (once) {these are from the Triodion}. Glory, Now and ever, "The language that I knew not." Then "Lord, now let," the Trisagion, "Theotokos Virgin," "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), Glory, Now and ever, "More honorable than the Cherubim," "Heavenly King," the Prostrations {the Prayer of Saint Ephraim is implied here}, the Forgiveness Rite, as is customary {this could be an error, since the Typikon for the Triodion indicates that the Forgiveness Rite is only done on the Eve of Great Lent, that is, in the Vespers on the evening of Cheesefare Sunday}, and Dismissal.
    On Monday the Matins of the Eve and the Hours are celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 2. The Dismissal follows the Prayer of the 6th Hour.
    On Monday evening the Great Vespers, and on Tuesday the Matins of the Feast together with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3 -5.
    The Leave-taking that Tuesday evening is chanted as prescribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 18.

SITUATION SIX

21.    If the Feast occurs on Wednesday or Thursday of the 4th or 6th Week, in these two Situations the Vespers of the Pre-feast is celebrated as prescribed in Situation 2, Paragraph 9. The Matins of the Eve together with the Hours, are celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 2. The

*(Printed Page 451)*

=== LEAF p467 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation VI Concl. (§ 21); Situation VII (§ 22); Situation VIII (§§ 23–24) (p. 452)]

452

§ 2. Ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς
Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, ὡς διετυπώθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄
§ 3, 5, ἡ δὲ Ἀπόδοσις τῇ αὐτῇ ἑσπέρᾳ, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει
Γ΄ § 18.

Ζ΄.

22.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς Δ΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Τετάρτῃ
πρωῒ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα τὰ δύο Ἰδιόμελα τῆς σειρᾶς τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν
καὶ γ΄ Προεόρτια Κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον
ὁ ἀπρόσιτος τῇ οὐσίᾳ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ
Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.
    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωΐ, ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς Παραμονῆς καὶ αἱ Ὧραι
ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2. Μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν
τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας, ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ τῷ πρωῒ τῇ
Παρασκευῇ ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου ψάλλονται, ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3, 5.
    Ἡ ἀπόδοσις τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν
περιπτώσει Α΄ § 6, 7, 8.

Η΄.

23.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Δ΄ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Πέμπτῃ
πρωῒ ὁ προεόρτιος Ἑσπερινὸς ψάλλεται, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει
Β΄ § 9. Τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωῒ ὁ Ὄρθρος καὶ αἱ Ὧραι ὡς ἐν περιπτώσει
Α΄ § 2. Μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας, Ἀπόλυσις.

    Τὸ ἑσπέρας τῆς Παρασκευῆς, ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ τῷ
Σαββάτῳ ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Β § 10.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

24.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ

*(Printed Page 452)*

=== LEAF p468 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Six Concl. (§ 21); Situation Seven (§ 22); Situation Eight (§§ 23–24) (p. 453)]

453

Great Vespers and the Matins of the Feast together with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3 - 5. The Leave-taking that evening, is chanted as prescribed in Situation 3, Paragraph 18.

SITUATION SEVEN

22.    If the Feast occurs on Friday of the 4th week, on Wednesday morning following the Introductory Psalm, and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried," we chant the 2 Idiomela of the sequence of the Triodion, the Martyrikon and the 3 of the Pre-feast "Hidden mystery." Glory, Now and ever, "Today the unapproachable in essence." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise," and the rest of the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts.
    On Thursday morning, the Matins of the Eve and the Hours are celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 2. After the Prayer of the 6th Hour, the Dismissal.
    On Thursday evening, the Great Vespers and on Friday morning the Matins of the Feast together with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3 -5.
    The Leave-taking that Friday evening, as prescribed in Situation 1, Paragraphs 6 - 8.

SITUATION EIGHT

23.    If the Feast occurs on Saturday of the 4th Week, on Thursday morning the Vespers of the Pre-feast is celebrated as prescribed in Situation 2, Paragraph 9. On Friday morning, the Matins and the Hours are celebrated as prescribed in Situation 1, Paragraph 2. The Dismissal follows the Prayer of the 6th Hour.
    On Friday evening, the Great Vespers and on Saturday the Matins of the Feast together with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are celebrated as prescribed in Situation 2, Paragraph 10.

The Leave-taking

24.    On Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the

*(Printed Page 453)*

=== LEAF p469 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation VIII Concl. (§§ 24–25); Situation IX (§ 26) (p. 454)]

454

Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄,
καὶ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου γ΄, Δόξα, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ, Καὶ νῦν,
τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Εὐφραινέσθωσαν οἱ οὐρανοί, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ ἁγίου Ἰωάννου τῆς Κλίμακος ψάλλεται ἐν
τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις.
25.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ
Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος,
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια,
ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες
ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Καθίσματα τοῦ
Ἀρχαγγέλου Ὁ Μέγας στρατηγὸς καὶ Τῶν Ἀσωμάτων λειτουργῶν
(Ὅρα τῇ Κς΄)· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος, τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ
Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν
ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα
μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὰ τῆς
ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, καὶ τοῦ Ἀρχαγγέλου δ΄
(ὧδε ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτή), Δόξα, τῶν Αἴνων Δεῦτε ἐργασώμεθα, Καὶ
νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. Σήμερον σωτηρία καὶ καθεξῆς
ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου. Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ.

Θ΄.

26.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Δ΄ Κυριακῇ τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῇ
Παρασκευῇ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς
Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τοῖς πάθεσι δουλώσας
δίς, τὰ τοῦ ἤχου δ΄ Μαρτυρικὰ καὶ δ΄ τὰ Προεόρτια, Δόξα, Καὶ
νῦν, Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ
Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀναγινώσκεται ἡ δ΄ Στάσις τῶν Οἴκων τῆς
Θεοτόκου, ὡς εἴθισται, μετὰ Μικροῦ Ἀποδείπνου, Κοντάκιον μετὰ τὸ
Τρισάγιον Ἐπελεύσει πνεύματος.
    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς Παραμονῆς καὶ ἡ Λειτουργία

*(Printed Page 454)*

=== LEAF p470 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Eight Concl. (§§ 24–25); Situation Nine (§ 26) (p. 455)]

455

Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Feast and 3 of the Archangel. Glory, "Sent from heaven," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "The heavens rejoice." The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection (once) and of the Feast (twice) and Dismissal.
    The Service of Saint John of the Ladder is sung at Compline.

25.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as at Vespers, the Psalter of the day, and the Amomos. Kathismata at the 1st and 2nd Stasis [Stichologie], 2 of the Resurrection and one of the Feast. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode, and the Prokimenon. Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast. At the 3rd Ode, the Kathismata of the Archangel "The great general" and "Of the incorporeal liturgists" (see the 26th of the month); at the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth" and the entire order of the Sunday Matins Gospel as prescribed in the Sundays of the Triodion; then "More honorable." Exapostilaria of the Resurrection and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 of the Resurrection and 4 of the Archangel (at which point the Leave-taking of the Feast occurs). Glory of the Praises "Come, let us work," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology, "Today salvation" and the Liturgy of Basil the Great. Kontakion "To the Champion General."

SITUATION NINE

26.    If the Feast occurs on the 4th Sunday of Lent, Friday at Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried," we chant the Idiomelon "Having enslaved the passions" (twice), the 4 Martyrika of the Mode and 4 of the Pre-feast, Glory, Now and ever, "Gabriel proclaims." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Readings of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise" and the rest of the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts.
    In the evening the 4th Stasis of the Salutations to the Theotokos is read with the Small Compline, as is customary. Kontakion after the Trisagion "Through the descent of the Holy Spirit."
    On Saturday, the Matins of the Eve and the Liturgy as prescribed

*(Printed Page 455)*
