=== LEAF p221 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 1: Holy Unmercenaries Cosmas and Damian Concl. / November 8: Synaxis of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel (p. 206)]

206

νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον Σὲ τὴν μεσιτεύσασαν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος. Τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄. Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἄλλα δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ κανόνος τῶν Ἁγίων. Ἀπόστολος τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Η΄.    Ἡ Σύναξις τῶν Ἀρχιστρατήγων Μιχαὴλ καὶ Γαβριὴλ καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν Ἀσωμάτων Δυνάμεων.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ ς΄ κατὰ σειρὰν Προσόμοια, Δόξα Συγχάρητε ἡμῖν ἅπασαι αἱ τῶν Ἀγγέλων ταξιαρχίαι, Καὶ νῦν Συγχάρητε ἡμῖν ἅπασαι αἱ τῶν παρθένων χοροστασίαι. Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια, ὧν οἱ στίχοι Ὁ ποιῶν τοὺς Ἀγγέλους αὐτοῦ πνεύματα, καὶ τοὺς Λειτουργοὺς αὐτοῦ πυρὸς φλόγα, καὶ Εὐλόγει ἡ ψυχή μου τὸν Κύριον, Κύριε ὁ θεός μου ἐμεγαλύνθης σφόδρα. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Ὡς Ταξιάρχης καὶ Πρόμαχος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Τῶν Οὐρανίων Στρατιῶν, Θεοτοκίον Τὸ ἀπ’ αἰῶνος ἀπόκρυφον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος

*(Printed Page 206)*

=== LEAF p222 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 1: Holy Unmercenaries Cosmas and Damian Concl. / November 8: Synaxis of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel (p. 207)]

207

Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance: "O Gladsome Light" and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saints, Now and ever, "My creator and saviour"; the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saints and the Theotokion "You, the intercessor," and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Ypakoi of the Mode and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saints and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, and the Minologion of the Saints; the Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saints and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saints, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation." Then follows the Liturgy in which are sung the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saints. Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday, Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 8th.    Synaxis of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel and of all the Bodyless Powers.

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 6 Prosomia in order, Glory, "Rejoice with us, all you princes of the ranks of angels," Now and ever, "Rejoice with us, all you ranks of virgins." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day, and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Stichira Prosomia, whose verses are "Who makes His angels spirits, His ministers a flame of fire" and "Bless the Lord, O my soul! O Lord my God, You are very great." Glory, Now and ever, "As leader of the angelic ranks and champion"; the Apolytikion "Of the heavenly armies the arch-generals," the Theotokion "The mystery hidden for centuries," and Dismissal.
2.    At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion

*(Printed Page 207)*

=== LEAF p223 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 8: Synaxis of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel Cont. (p. 208)]

208

τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ· τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν· οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὁ ποιῶν τοὺς Ἀγγέλους αὐτοῦ πνεύματα, Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου, εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα Ταῖς τῶν Ἀσωμάτων, Οἰκτίρμων, προστασίαις, Καὶ νῦν Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τῷ ἀΰλῳ θρόνῳ (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Θεοτόκου Ὑγρὰν διοδεύσας καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἀσωμάτων Τοὺς νοεροὺς τῶν Ἀσωμάτων τάξεων, οὗ ὁ στίχος Ἅγιοι τοῦ Θεοῦ, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, εἰς τὸ τέλος, καὶ ᾄσω γηθόμενος ταύτης τὴν Εἴσοδον. Εἰς τὴν γ΄ Ὠδήν, Ἐν τῇ σεπτῇ Εἰσόδῳ σου, εἰς τὴν ε΄, Ἔνδον εἰσῆλθες ἐν τῷ ναῷ τοῦ Θεοῦ, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Εἰς τὸ Ἅπας γηγενὴς τὰ ἱερὰ Εἰσόδια τῆς Θεομήτορος, τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια κατὰ σειράν. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ Προσόμοια Τῶν οὐρανίων Ταγμάτων ὡς προεξάρχοντα, Δόξα Ὅπου ἐπισκιάσῃ ἡ χάρις σου, Ἀρχάγγελε, καὶ νῦν Μακαρίζομέν σε, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός· τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, Τῶν Οὐρανίων Στρατιῶν, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος Ναός. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Ὁ ποιῶν τοὺς Ἀγγέλους, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν ς΄. Δόξα Συγχάρητε ἡμῖν, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Ὡς Ταξιάρχης καὶ πρόμαχος Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, Τῶν Οὐρανίων Στρατιῶν, Τὸ ἀπ’ αἰῶνος ἀπόκρυφον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς

*(Printed Page 208)*

=== LEAF p224 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 8: Synaxis of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel Cont. (p. 209)]

209

twice, and the Theotokion once; the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon "Who makes His angels spirits, His ministers a flame of fire." Then "Let everything that has breath," and the Gospel of Matins, then Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "Through the intercessions of the incorporeal powers"; Now and ever, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "O merciful One, have mercy upon me," and the Idiomelon "To the incorporeal throne" (look in the Liti). The Canon of the Theotokos "Passing the sea" [this is the Canon of the Small Paraklisis] and that of the Incorporeal "The intelligent of the bodiless ranks" [second Canon of the Mineon] with the Verse "Holy Ones of God." After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth"; at the end of the First Ode: "And I shall sing rejoicing in her entrance with gladness," in the Third Ode: "And in your solemn entrance"; in the Fifth: "You did go into the interior of the Temple of God,"; then we sing "More honorable." And in the Ninth: "For the entrance of the Theotokos"; the Exapostilaria in order. At the Praises: the Prosomia "As you are the highest in rank in the heavenly armies," Glory, "Wherever your grace casts its shadow, O leader of the angels" Now and ever, "We bless you, O Virgin Theotokos." Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, hymns from the 3rd and 6th Ode of the second Canon. After the Entrance, "O come let us worship... who are wonderful in His Saints." The Apolytikion "Of the heavenly armies the arch-generals," that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple." At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Who makes His angels," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
4.    If the Feast of the Archangels occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at "Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 of the Archangels. Glory, "Rejoice with us," Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, "As you are the highest in rank in the heavenly armies." The Apolytikia: that of the Resurrection, that of the Archangels "Of the heavenly armies the arch-generals," [the Theotokion] "The mystery hidden for centuries," and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of

*(Printed Page 209)*

=== LEAF p225 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 8: Synaxis of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel Concl. / November 11: Holy Martyrs Menas, Victor, Vincent, and Theodore the Studite (p. 210)]

210

κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν· τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος Τὰ Καθίσματα, ἓν Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ ἓν τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου, ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ στιχολογίᾳ τὸ τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ β΄ τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν. ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν· Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν δ΄. Δόξα Ὅπου ἐπισκιάσῃ, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄, καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος ναός, Ἀπόστολος τῶν Ταξιαρχῶν καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Ὁ ποιῶν τοὺς Ἀγγέλους Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙΑ΄.    Τῶν ἁγίων Μαρτύρων Μηνᾶ, Βίκτωρος καὶ Βικεντίου, [καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας Μάρτυρος Στεφανίδος·] καὶ τοῦ ὁσίου Πατρὸς ἡμῶν [καὶ Ὁμολογητοῦ] Θεοδώρου τοῦ Στουδίτου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτῶν μετὰ τῆς τοῦ ὁσίου Θεοδώρου ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄. Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Τὸν ἀριστέα τοῦ Χριστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν Ἰδοὺ πεπλήρωται, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 210)*

=== LEAF p226 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 8: Synaxis of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel Concl. / November 11: Holy Martyrs Menas, Victor, Vincent, and Theodore the Studite (p. 211)]

211

the Archangels and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata: one of the Resurrection and one of the Archangels with the Theotokion. At the Third Stichologia, the Kathisma of the Archangels and the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and the second of the Archangels. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection (read), then the Kathisma of the Archangels and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Archangels, and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel. Then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Archangels and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Archangels, Glory, "Wherever your grace casts its shadow," Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the second Canon of the Archangels. After the Entrance: the Resurrection Apolytikion, the Apolytikion of the Archangels, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple." Apostolos of the Archangels and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Who makes His angels," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 11th.    The Holy Martyrs Minas, Victor, Vikentios [and the Holy Martyr Stephanis] and of our Righteous Father [and Confessor], Theodore the Studite.

1.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day except Sunday, their Service is sung together with that of the Righteous Theodore according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saints. Glory of the Saints, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "The most excellent [person] of Christ" [see the Glory of Matins], Now and ever, "Behold, the prophecy is fulfilled"; the Apolytikia of the Resurrection and of the Saints, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 211)*

=== LEAF p227 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 11: Holy Martyrs Menas, Victor, Vincent, and Theodore the Studite Concl. / November 12: St. John the Merciful and St. Nilus / November 13: St. John Chrysostom (p. 212)]

212

Ἡ δὲ τοῦ Ὁσίου Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων· Αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄ (τὰ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ Ἀπόστιχα). Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἄλλα δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ κανόνος τῶν Ἁγίων· Ἀπόστολος τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς· Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙΒ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἰωάννου τοῦ Ἐλεήμονος καὶ τοῦ ὁσίου Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Νείλου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ἁγίου ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν.
    Εἰ δὲ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, ἡ τοῦ Ὁσίου Νείλου Ἀκολουθία καταλιμπάνεται ψαλλομένη ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις καὶ ψάλλεται μόνη ἡ τοῦ Ἐλεήμονος μετὰ τῆς ἀναστασίμου Ἀκολουθίας κατὰ τὴν ἀνωτέρω § 2 καὶ 3 διάταξιν.

Τῇ ΙΓ΄.    Τοῦ ἐν ἁγίοις Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Ἰωάννου Ἀρχιεπισκόπου Κωνσταντινουπόλεως τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια Τὴν χρυσήλατον Σάλπιγγα εἰς ς΄. Δόξα Ὅσιε τρισμάκαρ, Καὶ νῦν Τίς μὴ μακαρίσει σε. Εἴσοδος Φῶς

*(Printed Page 212)*

=== LEAF p228 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 11: Holy Martyrs Menas, Victor, Vincent, and Theodore the Studite Concl. / November 12: St. John the Merciful and St. Nilus / November 13: St. John Chrysostom (p. 213)]

213

The Service of the Righteous Saint is chanted at Compline.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, we do the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Ypakoi and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos; the Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saints and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection and the Minologion of the Saints. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saints and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Saints (the Aposticha of Vespers). Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation." Then the Liturgy follows, in which are sung the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saints. Apostolos of the Saints and Gospel of the Sunday, Communion Hymn "Praise," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

The 12th.    Our Father among the Saints John the Merciful, [Patriarch of Alexandria,] and of our Righteous Father Nilos [the Sinaite].

1.    If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day except Sunday, the Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, the Service of the Righteous Nilos is omitted, since it is sung at Compline, and only that of the Merciful One is chanted together with the Resurrection Service, according to Paragraphs 2 and 3 above.

The 13th.    Our Father among the Saints John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople.

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the First Stasis of the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we sing, in six, the 3 Prosomia of the Saint "The gold-wrought trumpet" twice each, Glory, "Righteous Saint, thrice-blessed," Now and ever, "Who will not call you blessed?" Entrance, "O

*(Printed Page 213)*

=== LEAF p229 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — November 13: St. John Chrysostom Cont. (p. 214)]

214

ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια, Δόξα Σάλπιγξ χρυσόφωνος, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ τοῦ στόματός σου καθάπερ, τὸ Θεοτοκίον Ὁ δι’ ἡμᾶς γεννηθεὶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον ἅπαξ· τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν· οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Τὸ στόμα μου λαλήσει σοφίαν, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα Σήμερον σκιρτῶσιν ἐν πνεύματι, Καὶ νῦν Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἐξεχύθη ἡ χάρις ἐν χείλεσί σου, Κανόνες ὁ τῆς Θεοτόκου Ὑγρὰν διοδεύσας, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, εἶτα τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ Προσόμοια Χρυσοῦ τηλαυγέστερον, Δόξα Χρυσέοις ἔπεσι, Καὶ νῦν, Δέσποινα πρόσδεξαι, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, τὰ Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Ἁγίου· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ καθαρώτατος ναός, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον αἰώνιον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου, δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ ὁ λυτρωτής μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ

*(Printed Page 214)*

=== LEAF p230 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — November 13: St. John Chrysostom Cont. (p. 215)]

215

Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Prosomia, Glory, "The Golden-voiced Trumpet," Now and ever, "Theotokos, you are the vine"; the Apolytikion "Grace has shown forth from your mouth," the Theotokion "Born for our sakes," and Dismissal.
2.    At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion twice, and the Theotokion once; the Psalter and the Polyeleos, the Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV, and the Prokimenon "My mouth proclaims wisdom." Then "Let everything that has breath," and the Gospel of [Matins]; then Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "Today rejoice in the Spirit," Now and ever, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," the Verse "O merciful One, have mercy upon me," and the Idiomelon "Grace has poured out in your lips." The Canon of the Theotokos "Passing the sea" {this is the Canon of the Small Paraklisis} and the Canon of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," then we sing "More honorable." Then the Exapostilarion and the Theotokion. At the Praises: the Prosomia, "More brilliant than gold," Glory, "Golden drops," Now and ever, "Lady, accept," Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, hymns from the 3rd and 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "The all-pure Temple"; the Apostolos and the Gospel. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "In eternal memory," "We have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.
4.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, "My creator and saviour"; the Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that of the Saint, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Saint and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order;

*(Printed Page 215)*
