=== LEAF p1031 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Bright Week Concluded – Byzantine Mode – Canon – Canonarch – Canticle Part 1) (p. 1016 / TD-37)]

TD-37

ent Mode ending with Mode IV Plagal on The Sunday of Thomas. In this sequence of Modes, Mode Varys is omitted because of its grave character considered unsuitable for this joyous period. For Orthodox Christians, Bright Week begins a period of celebration that continues for fifty days until Pentecost.

*BYZANTINE MODE: See MODE.

CANON (κανών, ὁ· κανόνες, οἱ) See also KANON, KANONES: A principal part in the Orthros (MATINS) service although it may appear elsewhere. A Canon is a lengthy poetic form composed of nine odes, with each ode being made up of many hymns, the number and source of which are regulated by the TYPIKON. Each ode takes its theme from and is therefore linked to a Biblical canticle (e.g., Ode 1 is linked to Exodus 15:1-19, the Canticle of Moses) which serves as its source. In churches, except those located in monasteries, apart from the Magnificat, the Biblical Canticles are usually omitted, simple refrains taking the place of the biblical verses. In practice, most Canons contain only eight Odes, since Ode 2 is only used on Tuesdays in Lent, though the acrostics often suggest that there were originally nine odes. Normally three, and on Sundays four Canons are prescribed, in such a way as to make each Ode, including the Irmos, consist of 14 Troparia. (Excerpted from PL and from AE)

CANONARCH (κανονάρχης, ὁ): The Canonarch is one of the chanters or readers whose task is to see that the other singers sing the correct texts in the correct mode and with the correct melody by reciting in a recitative style each phrase of a slow (andante or slower) hymn before the chanter finally sings it with its proper melody and rhythm. The Canonarch is higher in rank than a Reader and lower in rank than the Deacon. The Canonarch is tonsured by the Bishop. This tonsure seems to have covered both the Subdeacon and the Canonarch similar to a single tonsure having covered the office of taper-bearer, chanter and reader. The Slavonic Typikon also mentions that a monastic canonarch performs his duties with a covered head (i.e. wearing a klobuk).

CANTICLE (ᾠδή, ἡ): ODE OR SONG: The word is derived

*(Printed Page TD-37)*

=== LEAF p1032 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Canticle Continued: Biblical Canticles 1–9 Part 1) (p. 1017 / TD-38)]

TD-38

from canticulum, (diminutive of canticum, a song, from the Latin cantare (to sing). It is used in the Roman Catholic English translation of the Bible as the equivalent of the Vulgate canticum in most, but not all, of the uses of that word. The Authorized Version does not make such a distinction, but regularly translates from the Hebrew and the Greek “song”.

The Biblical Odes (also called canticles) are nine hymns that are taken directly from Scripture. They are chanted at Matins and form the basis of the canon, a major component of Matins.

The title Canticle has been applied (a) to certain prayers and poetical compositions of Biblical origin other than the Psalms; and (b) to the nine (in practice, eight) subdivisions of the canon (originally designed to accompany the reading of the Biblical canticles).

There were Nine Biblical canticles appointed for use at MATTINS (ORTHROS) Gr. Ὄρθρος. In the Greek Orthodox Church the canticles are found in the back of the Psalter as follows:
1. The (First) Song of Moses (Exodus 15:1-19)
2. The (Second) Song of Moses (Deuteronomy 32:1-43)
3. The Prayer of Hannah the mother of Samuel the Prophet (1 Samuel 2:1-10)
4. The Prayer of Habakkuk the Prophet (Habakkuk 3:2-19)
5. The Prayer of Isaiah the Prophet (Isaiah 26:9-20)
6. The Prayer of Jonah the Prophet (Jonah 2:2-9)
*7. The Prayer of the Three Holy Children (Daniel 3:26-56])
*8. The Song of the Three Holy Children (The Benedicite, Daniel 3:57-88)

*The above two odes are found only in the Septuagint. Verse numberings are according to the Psalter which differ from Brenton.

9. The Song of the Theotokos (the Magnificat, Luke 1:46-

*(Printed Page TD-38)*

=== LEAF p1033 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Canticle Concluded – Cassock Part 1) (p. 1018 / TD-39)]

TD-39

55) and the Prayer of Zacharias, the father of the Forerunner (the Benedictus, Luke 1:68-79.)

Originally, all of the above odes (1-9) were chanted in their entirety every day, with a short refrain inserted between each verse.
Eventually, short hymns (TROPARIA) were composed to replace these refrains, a process traditionally inaugurated by Saint Andrew of Crete.
Normally, the Second Ode is omitted because of its severe judgment of man. The most notable exception to this is that of the Great Penitential Canon of St. Andrew of Crete which is chanted during Great Lent.
Gradually over the centuries, the verses of the Biblical Canticles were omitted (except for the Magnificat), and only the composed troparia were read, linked to the original canticles by an irmos. During Great Lent, however, the original Biblical Canticles are still read.
(Adapted from The Festal Menaion by MM and KW and the New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia at http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03301a.htm)

CASSOCK (ράσον, τὸ· χιτών, ὁ· ἱμάτιον, τό): Cassocks exist in two forms, the ‘inner cassock’ and the ‘outer cassock.’ The Inner (or under) cassock is a floor-length garment that has long sleeves fitted like shirtsleeves. The ‘outer (over) cassock’ is also a floor-length garment, but more loosely fitting, with large sleeves. The wearing of inner-cassocks and outer-cassocks is common to bishops, priests, deacons, monks and nuns. Permission to wear a cassock is often given to seminarians, monastic novices, sub-deacons and readers in some parishes.

The latter two Greek words in the title above (χιτών and ἱμάτιον) refer to the two ancient Greek garments commonly worn by a male or female; these words are of interest because they are both used in one of the hymns found in the service of Baptism for either child or adult as follows: “A robe of divine light bestow upon me, O You that for vesture array Yourself with Light; and bestow many mercies, O Christ our God, Who are plentious in mercy.”

*(Printed Page TD-39)*

=== LEAF p1034 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Cassock Concluded – Celebrant – Censer – Ceremony) (p. 1019 / TD-40)]

TD-40

(«Χιτῶνά μοι παράσχου φωτεινόν, ὁ ἀναβαλλόμενος φῶς ὡς ἱμάτιον, πολυέλεε Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν.») The same hymn, therefore, is used for either gender of an individual being baptized.

CELEBRANT (ἱεροτελεστής, ὁ): The Bishop or Priest who celebrates the Holy Eucharist. The Deacon may not celebrate the Eucharist but may assist in it.

CENSER (θυμιατόν, τό, or θυμιατήριον, τό): In the Eastern Orthodox Church a censer is similar in design to the Roman Catholic thurible, but with more than one chain and often with the addition of small bells. Censers are used constantly in Orthodox services, especially at every VESPERS, MATINS, and Divine Liturgy. If a deacon is present, he typically does much of the censing, otherwise the duty is that of the Priest. Tonsured servers or acolytes are permitted to prepare and carry the censer, but may not swing it during prayers. Censing is the practice of swinging a censer suspended from chains towards something or someone, typically an icon or person, so that the smoke from the burning incense travels in that direction. Burning incense generally represents the prayers of the people rising towards Heaven. One commonly sung Psalm during the censing is “Let my prayer rise like incense before You, my hands like the evening sacrifice.” («Κατευθυνθήτω ἡ προσευχή μου, ὡς θυμίαμα ἐνώπιόν σου· ἔπαρσις τῶν χειρῶν μου, θυσία ἑσπερινή.») Some Orthodox Christians use a small hand censer (KATZION) on their home altars. The katzion, which may also be used in church, has no suspending chains or bells and is usually waved in a cross-wise fashion before the person or item being censed.

Today, for censing in the home one may use granulated incense and small, concave charcoal briquettes. One lights the corner of the briquette with a flame, then places it in the censer and extinguishes the flame. After the glowing sparks traverse the entire briquette, it is ready to have incense placed on it.

CEREMONY (τελετή, ἡ): See TELETI. A sacred ritual service within the liturgical life of the Orthodox Church.

*(Printed Page TD-40)*

=== LEAF p1035 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Chasmodia – Chazranion – Chief Secretary – Choneftirion – Chorostaton Archierefs – Chorostatundes Archieris – Chromatic – Chrism Part 1) (p. 1020 / TD-41)]

TD-41

CHASMODIA (χασμῳδία, ἡ): Confusion resulting from disorder, lack of clarity and jarring dissonance in the chanting of the services. See Canon XV of the Council in Laodicaea.

CHAZRANION (χαζράνιον, τό): A plain, unadorned walking stick.

CHIEF SECRETARY (᾿Αρχιγραμματεύς, ὁ): One who supervises other secretaries.

CHONEFTIRION (χωνευτήριον, τό): An area in or near the sanctuary containing a sink or wash basin for the clergy to wash their hands prior to the service of PROSKOMIDI and also to empty material discarded from any of the sacraments. See also THALASSIDION.

CHOROSTATON ARCHIEREFS, O (Χοροστατῶν ᾿Αρχιερεύς, ὁ): An officiating hierarch (Archpriest or Bishop).

CHOROSTATUNDES ARCHIERIS, I (Χοροστατοῦντες ᾿Αρχιερεῖς, οἱ): officiating hierarchs (Archpriests or Bishops).

*CHROMATIC (χρωματικόν): A type of scale or MODE using tones outside the diatonic scale; these tones can be approximated by playing them on the dark keys (flats or sharps) of a piano keyboard. For example, the scale c-d-e-f-g-a-b-c belongs to the diatonic Mode IV Plagal. The scale c-dflat-e-f-g-aflat-b-c, on the other hand, belongs to the chromatic form of Mode II Plagal.

CHRISM (Χρῖσμα, τό): Today also called Myrrh, it has also been known by the names “oil,” “oil of thanksgiving,” “oil of anointing,” “Chrism of thanksgiving,” “Chrism from heaven,” “mystical Chrism,” “myrrh,” “divine myrrh,” “mystical myrrh,” “great myrrh” and “holy and great myrrh.” The Chrism is used to annoint churches that are being consecrated. It is sanctified at irregular intervals by an individual patriarchate but usually every 10-11 years. The amount produced is based on the requirements of the churches of each individual Patriarchate. The official list of the materials used in

*(Printed Page TD-41)*

=== LEAF p1036 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Chrism Concluded – Church Part 1) (p. 1021 / TD-42)]

TD-42

the chrism sanctified at the Patriarchate of Constantinople is based on an ancient formula of the Jewish prophets (Exodus 30:22-25) and contains 64 specific ingredients including pure olive oil, balsam and other fragrant spices.

CHURCH (ἐκκλησία, ἡ or ἱερὸς ναός, ὁ): In Greek the first term is most often used to describe the structure of the building while the latter term “Holy Temple” implies also function. Orthodox Christians worship and continue to worship Christ in structures that are more often than not determined by the social, political and economic climate of their area and/or the theological understandings of the era. The earliest Christians gathered together and worshipped in private homes until persecutions began. From this point they sought refuge in caves, catacombs and other such areas where they could worship Christ in safety. Shortly after Constantine the Great issued the ‘edict of toleration’, Christians began to build churches.

One of these magnificent structures that remains largely intact today is the Church of Agia Sophia or “Holy Wisdom” in what was once the capital city of the Byzantine Empire, Constantinople. The building of this Church was commissioned by Constantine himself; however, after a fire destroyed much of the church and upon the exile of Saint John Chrysostom by Empress Eudoxia, the church was rebuilt by the Byzantine Emperor Justinian. Upon its completion and consecration on December 27, 537 this grandest of churches, was and remains the model for churches throughout Eastern Christendom.

Today, our churches are generally structured in the form of a cross with a prominent dome over the center. They are divided into three sections, the NARTHEX, the NAVE, and the SANCTUARY. The interior and the exterior of the Church flow naturally from the dome to the ground creating a sacred space that is aesthetically pleasing. When enriched also by the iconography, the whole structure reflects the beautiful multiplicity of God’s own artifact, the cosmos, where we have unity in variety and variety in unity. The structures frequently boast a golden Cross on their highest point, usually illumined through-

*(Printed Page TD-42)*

=== LEAF p1037 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Church Concluded – Chyma – Codex – Commemoration Part 1) (p. 1022 / TD-43)]

TD-43

out the night, shining forth and conquering the darkness.

The intent of the Orthodox house of worship is to create an awareness of God’s presence. No distinction is made between spiritual and sensory perception. Not only the spirit but also the senses experience the splendor and beauty of God’s creation. This total perception can be overwhelming. An old Russian chronicle relates that Prince Vladimir of Kiev could not decide which faith to adopt for himself and his people until his envoys reported from Constantinople that they had witnessed services there such that “We knew not whether we were in heaven or on earth,” they declared, “for on earth there is no such splendor or such beauty, and we are at a loss to describe it. We know only that God dwells there among men.”

CHYMA (χῦμα): Lit. In a poured, flowing manner. Most commonly, the term is interpreted as “to be read.” On occasion, the term signifies chanting in a flowing, recitative style, like the priest’s chanted petitions. The distinction between reading and chanting is made clearer in the Typikon when we often have, in the first instance, ‘it is said chyma’ (λέγεται χῦμα) or, in the second instance, ‘it is chanted chyma’ (ψάλλεται χῦμα).

CODEX, pl. CODICES (κῶδιξ, ὁ, κώδικες, οἱ): This was the word for a book made of thin wooden strips coated with wax upon which one could write. The usual modern sense of codex, “book formed of bound leaves of paper or parchment,” is due to Christianity. By the first century B.C. there existed notebooks made of leaves of parchment, used for rough copy, first drafts, and notes. By the first century A.D. such manuals were used for commercial copies of classical literature. The Christians adopted this parchment manual format for the Scriptures used in their liturgy because a codex is easier to handle than a scroll and because one can write on both sides of a parchment but on only one side of a papyrus scroll. By the early second century all Scripture was reproduced in codex form. In traditional Christian iconography, therefore, the Hebrew prophets are represented holding scrolls and the Evangelists holding codices. The codex later replaced the scroll for writing lengthy church documents.

COMMEMORATION (μνημόσυνον, τό): In the Orthodox Church,

*(Printed Page TD-43)*

=== LEAF p1038 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Commemoration Concluded – Compline – Confessor Part 1) (p. 1023 / TD-44)]

TD-44

the act and service of eternally remembering the life and death of any person. During feasts we also commemorate a sacred event or personality.

COMPLINE (ἀπόδειπνον, τό) Slav. Povecheriye: Lit. ‘after-supper’prayer. See also APODIPNON: The English word compline is derived from the Latin completorium, as Compline is the completion of the working day. The entire subject of the historical development of Compline is carefully discussed in the orthodox wiki article at http://orthodoxwiki.org/Compline.

Compline is a service which is part of the daily cycle of services. It is the final church service of the day and takes place after supper prior to going to sleep. In the Greek Orthodox Church of today, the service exists in two forms: Great Compline and Small Compline. This Compline service or office whether the Great or Small form will include a Canon to the Theotokos in the Mode of the Week (found in the OKTOICHOS). Services to saints in the MINEON that for some reason cannot be celebrated on their appointed day may be done on the nearest convenient day at Compline. In such cases, the Canon for the Saint would be read in addition to the Canon to the Theotokos followed by the Hymns (STICHIRA) to the saint from VESPERS. There are also particular days such as FOREFEASTS, AFTERFEASTS, and days during the PENTIKOSTARION period that have special Canons for Compline composed for them. The service always ends with the mutual asking of forgiveness. In some Orthodox traditions, Evening Prayers (i.e. those said before sleeping) will be read near the end of Compline. In the monasteries of the Holy Mountain of Athos today, an ancient practice is observed in which all those of the community who are present at the end of Compline venerate the Relics and Icons in the church, and receive the blessing of the priest. For the exact order of prayer of the Great Compline Service in English, see http://www.goarch.org/chapel/liturgical_texts/greatcompline.

*CONFESSOR (ὁμολογητής, ὁ): Saints who through their teachings and theological writings proclaimed and defended their faith, often at the expense of great personal suffering through perse-

*(Printed Page TD-44)*

=== LEAF p1039 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Confessor Concluded – Creed Part 1) (p. 1024 / TD-45)]

TD-45

cution: e.g., Maximos the Confessor, 21 January.

CREED (Σύμβολον τῆς Πίστεως, τό): From the Latin credo, “I believe.” The Creed, known in Greek as the Symbol of Faith (Σύμβολον τῆς Πίστεως) meaning the “bringing together” of the worshippers to confess their Christian faith.

The Nicene Creed is also called the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed since it was formally drawn up at the First Ecumenical Council in Nicaea (325) and further ratified at the Second Ecumenical Council in Constantinople (381).

In the early Church there were many different forms of the Christian confession of faith—many different “creeds.” These creeds were always used originally in service of Baptism. Before being baptized, a person had to state what he believed. The earliest Christian creed was quite likely a simple confession of faith that Jesus is the Christ, i.e., the Messiah, and that the Christ is Lord. By publicly confessing this belief, the person could be baptized into Christ, dying and rising with Him into the New Life of the Kingdom of God in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.

As time passed, different churches had different creedal statements, all professing the identical faith, yet using different forms and expressions, with different degrees of detail and emphasis. These creedal forms usually became more detailed and elaborate in those areas where questions about the faith and various heresies had arisen.

In the fourth century, a great controversy developed in Christendom about the nature of the Son of God (also called in the Scripture the Word or Logos). Some said that the Son of God is a creature like everything else made by God. Others contended that the Son of God is eternal, divine, and uncreated. Several councils met and made many statements of faith about the nature of the Son of God. The controversy raged throughout the entire Christian world.

This controversy was resolved by definition of the council which the Emperor Constantine called in the city of Nicaea in the year 325 which was ultimately accepted by the Orthodox Church as the proper Symbol of Faith. This council, now called the First Ecu-

*(Printed Page TD-45)*

=== LEAF p1040 ===
[Appendix: Extended Dictionary of Typikon Related Terms (Creed Concluded) (p. 1025 / TD-46)]

TD-46

menical Council, stated the following:
“I believe in one God, the Father, the Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and invisible.
And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father before all ages; Light of Light, true God of true God, begotten, not created, of one essence with the Father, through Whom all things were made;
Who for us and for our salvation came down from the heavens and was incarnate by the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man.
Crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, He suffered and was buried;
Rising on the third day according to the Scriptures,
And ascending into the heavens, He is seated at the right hand of the Father;
And coming again in glory to judge the living and the dead, His Kingdom shall have no end;
And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life, Who proceeds from the Father, Who together with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified, Who spoke through the prophets;”

Connected with the controversy about the Son of God, the Divine Word, was the dispute about the procession of the Holy Spirit. The following definition of the Council in Constantinople in 381, which has come to be known as the Second Ecumenical Council was added to the Nicene statement above:
“And [I believe] in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of Life, Who proceeds from the Father; Who together with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified, Who spoke through the prophets. In one Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church I acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins. I expect the resurrection of the dead; and the life of the age to come. Amen.”

This now complete Symbol of Faith was ultimately adopted throughout the entire Orthodox Church. It was put into the first person form “I believe” and used for the formal and official confession of faith made by a person (or his or her sponsor-godparent) at their baptism. It is also used as the formal statement of faith by a non-

*(Printed Page TD-46)*
