=== LEAF p601 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of June: Nativity of the Forerunner (June 24); Continuation of Feast (§ 2 Concl., §§ 3–5, § 6 Opening) (p. 586)]

586

ἡμῶν· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια Ὢ τοῦ παραδόξου θαύματος εἰς δ΄. Δόξα, Ἀστὴρ ἀστέρων Πρόδρομος, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ α΄ καὶ τῆς ς΄ τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον· Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Σαββάτῳ, τὸ ἑσπέρας τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου δ΄ (τὰ τοῦ μικροῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ)· Δόξα, Ἡ Ἐλισάβετ συνέλαβε, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Βλέπε τὴν Ἐλισάβετ, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, Ἀπόλυσις καὶ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς.
    Τὸ πρωῒ ψάλλεται μόνη ἡ ἀναστάσιμος Ἀκολουθία.

5.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου ς΄, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Προδρόμου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Βλέπε τὴν Ἐλισάβετ, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Προδρόμου, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

6.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τοῦ Προδρόμου μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων· ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ Στιχολογίᾳ, τὸ τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ ἀναστάσιμος κανὼν καὶ οἱ τοῦ Προδρόμου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος, εἶτα τὸ

*(Printed Page 586)*

=== LEAF p602 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of June: Nativity of the Forerunner (June 24); Continuation of Feast (§ 2 Concl., §§ 3–5, § 6 Opening) (p. 587)]

587

both Canons with the Verse “Saint of God, pray for us.” After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” then we sing “More honorable”; the Exapostilarion and the Theotokion. At the Praises: the four Prosomia “O, of the wondrous miracle!” Glory, “The Forerunner, the star of stars,” Now and ever, “O Theotokos, you are the [true] vine,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.

3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, then the hymns from the 3rd Ode of the First Canon and from the 6th Ode of the Second Canon. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Forerunner, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Protector of all Christians,” Apostolos and Gospel of the Forerunner. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial,” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.

4.    If the Feast of the Forerunner occurs on a Saturday, that evening at Vespers, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 6 Resurrection Stichira and four of the Forerunner (those of the Small Vespers) Glory, “Elizabeth conceived,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “Look at Elizabeth.” The Apolytikion of the Resurrection, that of the Forerunner, the Theotokion, Dismissal and the Leave-taking of the Feast.
    In the morning only the Resurrection Service is sung.

5.    If the Feast of the Forerunner occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 of the Forerunner. Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Readings of the Forerunner. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “Look at Elizabeth.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner, the Theotokion and Dismissal.

6.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Forerunner, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Forerunner and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Forerunner with the Theotokia. At the Third Stasis [Stichologia], the Kathisma of the Forerunner and the Theotokion. The Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi and the Prokimenon, the Canons of the Resurrection and of the Forerunner. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the

*(Printed Page 587)*

=== LEAF p603 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of June: Nativity of the Forerunner (June 24); Concl. of Feast (§ 6 Concl., § 7); Saints Peter and Paul (June 29); Opening Rubrics (§ 1, § 2 Opening) (p. 588)]

588

Κάθισμα τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα μετὰ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

7.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος τοῦ Προδρόμου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Προδρόμου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία [τῶν Χριστιανῶν]. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΚΘ΄. Τῶν ἁγίων ἐνδόξων καὶ Πρωτοκορυφαίων Ἀποστόλων Πέτρου καὶ Παύλου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια Ποίοις εὐφημιῶν εἰς ς΄, Δόξα, Τῷ τριττῷ τῆς ἐρωτήσεως, Καὶ νῦν, [Ὁ] διὰ σὲ θεοπάτωρ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα, Ἑορτὴ χαρμόσυνος, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἄμπελος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Οἱ τῶν Ἀποστόλων πρωτόθρονοι, τὸ Θεοτοκίον Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος ἀπόκρυφον, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ ἅπαξ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Πέτρε κορυφαῖε (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν), οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Ποία φυλακή· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ

*(Printed Page 588)*

=== LEAF p604 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of June: Nativity of the Forerunner (June 24); Concl. of Feast (§ 6 Concl., § 7); Saints Peter and Paul (June 29); Opening Rubrics (§ 1, § 2 Opening) (p. 589)]

589

Forerunner and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forerunner and the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then, after the “More honorable,” we sing the Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Forerunner, Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

7.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the 4 hymns of the Beatitudes of the Mode, and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Second Canon of the Forerunner. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Forerunner, of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Protector [of all Christians,”] Apostolos and Gospel of the Forerunner. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “In [eternal] memorial,” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.

The 29th - The Holy, Glorious and the First in Eminence Among the Apostles, Peter and Paul.

1.    In Vespers following the Introductory Psalm and the First Stasis of the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 3 Prosomia “With what garlands of praise” repeating each twice, Glory, “Christ by asking three times,” Now and ever, “The Prophet David, ancestor of God.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the three Idiomela, Glory, “A joyful feast,” Now and ever, “O Theotokos, you are the true vine.” The Apolytikion “First in eminence among the Apostles” and the Theotokion “The mystery hidden before all time” and Dismissal.

2.    At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion twice and the Theotokion once; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon “To all the earth.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Gospel, Psalm 50 read, Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Apostles,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy on me” and the Idiomelon “O Peter, pinnacle of the Apostles” (look for this in the Liti). Both Canons. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “What prison held you not as its captive?”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie “I

*(Printed Page 589)*

=== LEAF p605 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of June: Saints Peter and Paul (June 29); Concl. of Feast (§ 2 Concl., § 3); Sunday Concurrence (§§ 4–5) (p. 590)]

590

Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, [4 Στιχηρα τοῦ Πέτρου καὶ Παύλου Ὁ ἐξ ὑψίστων κληθείς, παραληφθέντα λανθασμένως], τὰ Προσόμοια Ὁ τοῦ ἀνάρχου Πατρὸς εἰς δ΄. Δόξα, Ἡ πάνσεπτος τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον [τῆς Ἑορτῆς].

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ α΄ Κανόνος δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Οἱ τῶν Ἀποστόλων πρωτόθρονοι, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ἀποστόλων. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἀποστόλων ς΄, Δόξα τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῶν Ἀποστόλων. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Ἑορτὴ χαρμόσυνος, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἀποστόλων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ, εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ψάλλεται ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῶν Ἀποστόλων καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Ἀποστόλων καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα, ἓν Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ ἓν τῶν Ἀποστόλων μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ Στιχολογίᾳ τῶν Ἀποστόλων καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ ἀναστάσιμος Κανὼν καὶ οἱ δύο τῶν Ἀποστόλων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος, (εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τῶν Ἀποστόλων μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου)· {Οἱ ὕμνοι ἐντὸς παρενθέσεως δὲν ψάλλονται ἐδῶ ἀλλὰ μόνον ἡ Ὑπακοὴ - μία παράβλεψις τοῦ Βιολάκη}· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Ἀποστόλων, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τῶν Ἀποστόλων μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἀποστόλων δ΄· Δόξα, Ἡ πάνσεπτος τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

*(Printed Page 590)*

=== LEAF p606 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of June: Saints Peter and Paul (June 29); Concl. of Feast (§ 2 Concl., § 3); Sunday Concurrence (§§ 4–5) (p. 591)]

591

shall open my mouth,” then the “More honorable”; the Exapostilarion and the Theotokion. At the Praises: {4 Stichira of Peter and Paul “He who was called from on high”; these 4 Stichira are mistakenly omitted here by Violakis}, four Prosomia “He of the timeless Father,” Glory, “The revered celebration of the Apostles,” Now and ever, “O Theotokos, you are the true vine,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion [of the Feast].

3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, 4 hymns from the 3rd Ode of the First Canon and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Second Canon. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion “First in prominence among the Apostles,” that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Protector of all Christians,” Apostolos and Gospel of the Apostles. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.

4.    If the Feast of the Apostles occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection and 6 of the Apostles. Glory of the Apostles, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Apostles. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, “A joyful feast,” Now and ever, “My creator and savior.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Apostles, the Theotokion and Dismissal.

5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Apostles, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Apostles and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata: one of the Resurrection and one of the Apostles with the Theotokion; at the third Stasis [Stichologia] the Kathisma of the Apostles and the Theotokion, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and the two of the Apostles. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, (then the Kathisma of the Apostles and the Theotokion) {instead of the items in parenthesis the Ypakoi only is done here -- an editorial oversight by Violakis}; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Apostles and the Minologion; the Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Apostles and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Apostles, Glory, “The revered celebration of the Apostles,” Now and ever, “Most blessed” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

*(Printed Page 591)*

=== LEAF p607 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of June: Saints Peter and Paul (June 29); Concl. of Sunday Concurrence (§ 6); Synaxis of the Twelve Apostles (June 30); Opening Rubrics (§§ 1–3 Opening) (p. 592)]

592

6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος τῶν Ἀποστόλων. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἀποστόλων, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ἀποστόλων. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Λ΄. Ἡ Σύναξις τῶν ἁγίων ἐνδόξων Ἀποστόλων τῶν ΙΒ΄.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλονται τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Ποίοις εὐφημιῶν [εἰς ς΄] καὶ γ΄ Προσόμοια τῶν ΙΒ΄ Ἔδωκας καυχήματα. Δόξα, Ἡ πάνσεπτος, τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Τίς μὴ μακαρίσει σε, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Στιχηρὰ τῶν Αἴνων Ὁ οὐρανόθεν τὴν χάριν, Δόξα, Ἑορτὴ χαρμόσυνος, Καὶ νῦν, Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὡς τῶν Ἀποστόλων πρωτόθρονοι, Δόξα, Ἀπόστολοι Ἅγιοι, Καὶ νῦν, Σὲ τὴν μεσιτεύσασαν, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικόν, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπόστολοι Ἅγιοι, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ δύο τῆς α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίας Καθίσματα τῶν Ἀποστόλων μετὰ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα καὶ οἱ δύο Κανόνες· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Ἀποστόλων καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν ΙΒ΄, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄ Προσόμοια Ἡ κορυφαία κρηπὶς τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Δόξα, Ἣν διήλθετε κτίσιν φωτίσαντες, Καὶ νῦν, Δέσποινα πρόσδεξαι, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπόστολοι Ἅγιοι.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια ἐκ τῆς γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ α΄ Κανόνος {Πέτρου καὶ Παύλου} καὶ ἐκ τοῦ β΄ τῆς ς΄ {τῶν 12 Ἀποστόλων}. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν Κορυφαίων {Πέτρου καὶ Παύλου} καὶ τῶν ΙΒ΄ {Ἀποστόλων} καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Ἀπόστολος καὶ

*(Printed Page 592)*

=== LEAF p608 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of June: Saints Peter and Paul (June 29); Concl. of Sunday Concurrence (§ 6); Synaxis of the Twelve Apostles (June 30); Opening Rubrics (§§ 1–3 Opening) (p. 593)]

593

6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Second Canon of the Apostles. After the Entrance, the Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Apostles, of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Protector of all Christians,” Apostolos and Gospel of the Apostles. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.

The 30th - Synaxis in honor of the Holy and Glorious Twelve Apostles.

1.    In Vespers following the Introductory Psalm at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 3 Prosomia “With what garlands of praise” and 3 Prosomia of the 12 Apostles “You gave as the boastings of your church,” Glory, “The revered celebration of the Apostles,” Now and ever, “Who would not call you blessed?” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the three Stichira of the Praises “The grace from Heaven,” Glory, “A joyful feast,” Now and ever, “O Theotokos, you are the [true] vine.” The Apolytikion “First in eminence among the Apostles,” Glory, “O Holy Apostles” and the Theotokion “You, the intercessor,” and Dismissal.

2.    At Matins, after Psalm 50, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “O Holy Apostles” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter, the Kathismata and the Theotokion of the First and Second Stasis of the Apostles, Psalm 50 (read), and the two Canons. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma with its Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Apostles and the Minologion of the 12 Apostles. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” then we sing “More honorable,” the Exapostilarion and the Theotokion. At the Praises: the four Prosomia “You are the most eminent foundation of the Apostles,” Glory, “You went through and illuminated Creation,” Now and ever, “Lady, accept,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion “O Holy Apostles.”

3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, 4 hymns from the 3rd Ode of the First Canon {of Peter and Paul} and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Second Canon {of the 12 Apostles}. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of Peter and Paul, the Apolytikion of the 12 Apostles, that of the Saint of the Church, {and the Kontakion “Protector of all Christians”

*(Printed Page 593)*

=== LEAF p609 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of June: Synaxis of the Twelve Apostles (June 30); Concl. of Liturgy (§ 3 Concl.); Sunday Concurrence (§§ 4–6); Month of July: Opening Heading (July 1) (p. 594)]

594

Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν ΙΒ΄. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄ Ἔδωκας καυχήματα, Δόξα, Ἡ πάνσεπτος τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Ἑορτὴ χαρμόσυνος, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Ἀπόστολοι Ἅγιοι, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ, εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῶν ΙΒ΄ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, ὁ ἀναστάσιμος Κανὼν καὶ ὁ τῶν ιβ΄ Ἀποστόλων· ἀπὸ γ΄, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Ἀποστόλων, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν ΙΒ΄, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τῶν Ἀποστόλων, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἀποστόλων δ΄, Δόξα, Ἣν διήλθετε κτίσιν φωτίσαντες, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ β΄ Κανόνος τῶν Ἀποστόλων. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Ἀπόστολοι Ἅγιοι, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν ΙΒ΄. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

ΜΗΝ ΙΟΥΛΙΟΣ

Τῇ Α΄. Τῶν ἁγίων Ἀναργύρων Κοσμᾶ καὶ Δαμιανοῦ.

*(Printed Page 594)*

=== LEAF p610 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of June: Synaxis of the Twelve Apostles (June 30); Concl. of Liturgy (§ 3 Concl.); Sunday Concurrence (§§ 4–6); Month of July: Opening Heading (July 1) (p. 595)]

595

{which appears to have been omitted in error}. Apostolos and Gospel of the 12 Apostles. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.

4.    If the Feast of the Apostles occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Saints, “You gave as the boastings of your church,” Glory, “The revered celebration of the Apostles,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, “A joyful feast,” Now and ever, “My creator and savior.” The Apolytikion of the Resurrection, the Apolytikion “O Holy Apostles,” the Theotokion, and Dismissal.

5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the 12 Apostles and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the 12 Apostles. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Apostles, then the Kathisma of the Apostles and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection and the Minologion of the 12 Apostles. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Apostles and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Apostles, Glory, “You went through and illuminated Creation,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Second Canon of the Apostles. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Resurrection, the Apolytikion “O Holy Apostles,” that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Protector of all Christians,” Apostolos and Gospel of the 12 Apostles. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” “We have seen the [true] light” and Dismissal.

MONTH OF JULY

The 1st - The Holy Unmercenaries Cosmas and Damian.

*(Printed Page 595)*
