=== LEAF p321 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 5 Concluded: Vespers & Liturgy of Saint Basil (§ 2) and January 6 Matins Opening (§ 3) (p. 306)]

306

                     Ὁ Μέγας Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ ἡ Λειτουργία
                            τοῦ Μεγάλου Βασιλείου.

2.    Μετὰ τὴν τῆς Θ΄ Ὥρας ἀπόλυσιν, ὁ Διάκονος Εὐλόγησον
Δέσποτα, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Εὐλογημένη ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ Πατρὸς κτλ. ὁ
Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς) τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἶτα ὁ Διάκονος τὴν
Μ. Συναπτήν. Εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ δ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Τὸν
φωτισμὸν ἡμῶν εἰς ς΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπέκλινας κάραν τῷ
Προδρόμῳ. Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ
Ἀναγνώστης τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐποίησεν ὁ Θεὸς τὸν
οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν· μετὰ τὸ τέλος ἄρχεται ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλειν τὸ
Τροπάριον Ἐπεφάνης ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ὁλόκληρον· ὁ β΄ ἐπαναλαμβάνει Ἵνα
φωτίσῃς τοὺς ἐν σκότει καθημένους, Φιλάνθρωπε, δόξα σοι, ὅπερ
ἐπαναλαμβάνεται ἑκατέρωθεν ἕως οὗ ὁ Κανονάρχης πληρώσῃ τοὺς
Στίχους τοῦ ψαλμοῦ. Εἶτα αὖθις ὁ α΄ Χορὸς Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τὸ
Τροπάριον ὁλόκληρον. Μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ β΄ Κανονάρχης ἀναγινώσκει τὸ
Ε΄ Ἀνάγνωσμα Εἶπεν Ἠλίας τῷ Ἐλισσαιέ· μετὰ τὸ τέλος ὁ β΄ Χορὸς
ψάλλει Ἁμαρτωλοῖς καὶ τελώναις ὁλόκληρον· ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ Ποῦ γὰρ
εἶχε τὸ φῶς σου λάμψαι, ἐπαναλαμβάνεται ἐναλλὰξ ὑπὸ τῶν δύο
Χορῶν, ἕως οὗ ὁ Κανονάρχης πληρώσῃ τοὺς Στίχους τοῦ ψαλμοῦ·
ὁ α΄ αὖθις Κανονάρχης τὸ ς΄ Ἀνάγνωσμα Παραγένετο Νεεμὰν
βασιλέως Ἀσσυρίων καὶ μετὰ τὸ τέλος τὴν μικρὰν Συναπτὴν
Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, καὶ ψάλλεται τὸ Τρισάγιον, εἶτα λέγεται
ὁ Ἀπόστολος, καὶ μετὰ τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον ἐπ’ ἄμβωνος
καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου. Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε
(τὸν) Κύριον καὶ τὸ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς. Μετὰ τὴν Ὀπισθάμβωνον
Εὐχήν, ψάλλονται τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Φωνὴ Κυρίου καὶ τελεῖται ὑπὸ τοῦ
λειτουργοῦντος Ἱερέως ὁ Ἁγιασμός, ὡς εἴθισται, κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ
Μηναίῳ διάταξιν. Μετὰ τὸ τέλος τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ, ἁγιαζομένων τῶν
Χριστιανῶν, ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἀνυμνήσωμεν οἱ
πιστοί, καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο ἡ Ἀπόλυσις Δόξα σοι . . . ὁ ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ
ὑπὸ Ἰωάννου βαπτισθῆναι καταδεξάμενος διὰ τὴν ἡμῶν
σωτηρίαν Χριστός . . . . Ἐν δὲ τῇ τραπέζῃ ξηροφαγία.
3.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ψάλλονται
ἡ Λιτὴ καὶ τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῶν Ἀποστίχων (καθὸ μὴ ψαλέντα χθές)· εἶτα
τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς
τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ ἐκ τρίτου, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ
Πολυέλεος Αἰνεῖτε τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, εἶτα τὰ γ΄ Καθίσματα, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἡ θάλασσα

*(Printed Page 306)*

=== LEAF p322 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 5 Concluded: Vespers & Liturgy of Saint Basil (§ 2) and January 6 Matins Opening (§ 3) (p. 307)]

307

              Great Vespers and the Liturgy of Basil the Great.

2.    After the Dismissal of the 9th Hour, the Deacon “Bless, Master,”
the Priest “Blessed is the Kingdom of the Father” etc., the Patriarch (or
Archpriest) the Introductory Psalm, then the Deacon the Great Litany. At
“Lord, I have cried” we sing the 4 Idiomela “Our illumination,” repeating
the first 2. Glory, Now and ever, “You have bowed Your head before the
Forerunner.” Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome Light” and imme-
diately the Reader reads the Readings “In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth”; at the end, the First Choir begins singing the Hymn
“You have appeared to the world,” and the Second Choir repeats the refrain
“To give light to those who sit in darkness. Glory to You who loves
mankind,” which is repeated alternately by both Choirs until the Canonarch
completes the Verses of the Psalm. Then immediately the First Choir sings
Glory, Now and ever and the entire Hymn. After that, the second Canonarch
reads the 5th Reading “And Elijah said to Elisha”; at the end, the Second
Choir sings “To sinners and tax-collectors”; the refrain “Where indeed
should Your light have shone” is repeated alternately by the two Choirs,
until the Canonarch completes the verses of the Psalm; then the First
Canonarch recites the sixth Reading “So Naaman, captain of the host of the
king of Assyria.” Then the Small Litany “Let us pray to the Lord,” and the
Trisagios Hymn is sung, then the Apostolos and, following the “Alleluia,”
the Gospel is recited from the pulpit, and then follows the Liturgy of Basil
the Great. Communion Hymn “Praise the Lord” and “We have seen [true]
the Light.” After the Prayer behind the Pulpit, the Idiomela “The voice of
the Lord upon the waters” and the Service of the Blessing of the Waters, as
prescribed in the Mineon, is celebrated by the Priest who has performed the
Liturgy. After the end of the Blessing of the Waters Service, while the
faithful are blessed, the second Choir sings the Idiomelon “O faithful, let us
praise,” and Dismissal. “Glory, to You . . . May He who deigned to be
baptized by John in the Jordan for our salvation, Christ our true God . .
.” At the table, xerophagy [strict fast] is observed.
3.    On Friday in Matins, after Psalm 50, are sung the Liti and the
Idiomela of the Aposticha (since they were not sung yesterday); then the
Trisagion, the Apolytikion “When You, O Lord, were baptized in the
Jordan,” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion
“When You, O Lord, were baptized in the Jordan” (3 times), then the
Psalter and the Polyeleos “Praise the Name of the Lord” [Psalm 135 LXX].

*(Printed Page 307)*

=== LEAF p323 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 6 Matins Continued: Megalynaria of Ode 9 for Canons 1 & 2 (p. 308)]

308

εἶδε καὶ ἔφυγεν, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου,
ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Τὰ σύμπαντα σήμερον ἀγαλλιάσθω,
Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό· ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον·
Θεὸς λόγος ἐπεφάνη ἐν σαρκί, οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι ἀνὰ δ΄
ἄνευ Στίχου, εἰμὴ μόνον Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ, ἀπὸ γ΄
Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Ὅτε τῇ ἐπιφανείᾳ σου, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον,
ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι διπλαῖ, καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ
Θ΄ Ὠδὴ μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων.

                                Διὰ τὸν Α΄ Κανόνα.

        Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τῶν ἄνω
στρατευμάτων.
        Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ, ἐλθόντα
βαπτισθῆναι.
        Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ὑπὸ Προδρόμου, τὸ
βάπτισμα αἰτοῦντα [λαβόντα].
        Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ἐκ τῆς Πατρῴας, φωνῆς
μαρτυρηθέντα.
        [Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὸν ἕνα τῆς Τριάδος, κλίναντα τὸν
αὐχένα, καὶ βάπτισμα λαβόντα.]*
        [Προφῆτα, δεῦρο πρός με, ἔκτεινον τὴν χεῖρα, καὶ βάπτισόν
με τάχος.]*
        [Προφῆτα, ἄφες ἄρτι, καὶ βάπτισόν με θέλων· πληρῶσαι καὶ
γὰρ ἦλθον, πᾶσαν δικαιοσύνην.]*

                              Διὰ τὸν Β΄ Ἰαμβικόν.

        Σήμερον ὁ Δεσπότης, κλίνει τὸν αὐχένα, χειρὶ
τῇ τοῦ Προδρόμου.
        Σήμερον Ἰωάννης, βαπτίζει τὸν Δεσπότην, ἐν
ῥείθροις Ἰορδάνου.
        [Σήμερον ὁ Δεσπότης, νάμασιν ἐνθάπτει, βροτῶν τὴν
ἁμαρτίαν.]*
        [Σήμερον ὁ Δεσπότης, ἄνωθεν μαρτυρεῖται, Υἱὸς ἠγαπημένος.]*
        [Σήμερον ὁ Δεσπότης, ἦλθεν ἁγιάσαι, τὴν φύσιν τῶν
ὑδάτων.]*

*(Printed Page 308)*

=== LEAF p324 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 6 Matins Continued: Megalynaria of Ode 9 for Canons 1 & 2 (p. 309)]

309

Then the 3 Kathismata, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode Four, the
Prokimenon “The sea has seen and withdrawn”; then “Let everything that
has breath” and the Gospel of Matins, Psalm 50 read. Glory, “Today let all
things greatly rejoice,” Now and ever repeat the same hymn; the Verse
“Have mercy upon me, O God,” and the Idiomelon “God the Word
appeared to mankind in the flesh.” Both Canons with 4 hymns from each
Canon without verses except for Glory, Now and ever in each Ode. After
the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “When at Your epiphany”; after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion, the Ikos and the Minologion. Both (double) Katavasie and the
9th Ode with the Megalynaria:

                               For the First Canon.

        Magnify, O my soul, her who is greater in honor than the hosts
on high.
        Magnify, O my soul, Him who has come to be baptized in the
Jordan.
        Magnify, O my soul, Him who asks for [receives] baptism from
the Forerunner.
        Magnify, O my soul, Him to whom the voice of the Father bore
witness.
        [Magnify, O my soul, One of the Trinity who bowed His head
and received baptism.]*
        [‘O Prophet, come to me: stretch out your hand and baptize me
swiftly.’]*
        [‘O Prophet, suffer it to be so now, and baptize me as I
wish: for I have come to fulfil all righteousness.’]*

                            For the Second Canon Iambic.

        Today the Master bows His head beneath the hand of the
Forerunner.
        Today John baptizes the Master in the streams of Jordan.

        [Today the Master buries in the waters the sin of mortal man.]*

        [Today the Master receives testimony from on high, that He is
the beloved Son.]*
        [Today the Master has come to sanctify the nature of the
waters.]*

*(Printed Page 309)*

=== LEAF p325 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 6 Matins Concluded & Great Blessing of the Waters Opening (p. 310)]

310

        [Σήμερον ὁ Δεσπότης, τὸ βάπτισμα λαμβάνει, ὑπὸ
χειρὸς Προδρόμου.]*
        Δόξα. Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τῆς τρισυποστάτου, καὶ
ἀδιαιρέτου, θεότητος τὸ κράτος.
        Καὶ νῦν. Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὴν λυτρωσαμένην,
ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῆς κατάρας.

[* Σημ. Οἱ ἄνωθι στίχοι ἐντὸς παρενθέσεων καὶ μὲ ἀστερίσκους εὑρίσκονται εἰς τὸ
Μηναῖον (ἐκδ. Φῶς, 1960 καὶ Ἀποστολικὴ Διακονία, 1991). Δὲν εὑρίσκονται εἰς τὸ
Τυπικὸν ἢ εἰς τὰς τυπικὰς ὁδηγείας τοῦ Μηναίου.]

    Τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον ἐκ γ΄, Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Φῶς
ἐκ φωτὸς εἰς ς΄, Δόξα, Νάματα Ἰορδάνεια, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον ὁ
Χριστὸς καὶ ἡ Μεγάλη Δοξολογία.

    Μετὰ τὸ Ἅγιος ἀθάνατος, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς τοῦ Τρισαγίου τῆς
Δοξολογίας, ψάλλονται τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ¹ Φωνὴ Κυρίου
ἐπὶ τῶν ὑδάτων, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Πρὸς τὴν φωνὴν τοῦ βοῶντος ἐν τῇ
ἐρήμῳ. Τούτων ψαλλομένων, ἐξέρχεται ὁ Ἱερεὺς ἀπὸ τῆς Ὡραίας
Πύλης μετὰ τοῦ τιμίου Σταυροῦ προπορευομένων λαμπάδων καὶ τῶν
Διακόνων, ὁ δὲ Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς) κατέρχεται τοῦ Θρόνου
καὶ ἔρχεται ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τοῦ Ναοῦ, ἔνθα κεῖται ἡ τράπεζα καὶ τὸ
δοχεῖον τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ, φορῶν ἐπιτραχήλιον καὶ ὠμόφορον. Μετὰ τὸ
τέλος τῶν Ἰδιομέλων ὁ Κανονάρχης ἢ ὁ Διάκονος εὐθὺς ἀναγινώσκει
τὰς τρεῖς Προφητείας τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ καὶ ἀκολούθως τὸν Ἀπόστολον,
ὁ δὲ Πατριάρχης τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον· μετὰ τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη, ὁ Μ.
Ἀρχιδιάκονος τὴν μεγάλην Συναπτὴν τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ, τοῦ Πατριάρχου
μεταξὺ τούτου ἀναγινώσκοντος μυστικῶς τὴν Εὐχὴν Κύριε Ἰησοῦ
Χριστέ· πληρωθείσης τῆς Εὐχῆς συνάμα καὶ τῆς Συναπτῆς, ἐκφωνεῖ
τὴν Εὐχὴν Τριὰς ὑπερούσιε, ἐπισυνάπτων μετὰ τὸ τέλος ταύτης καὶ
τὴν ἑτέραν Εὐχὴν Μέγας εἶ Κύριε καὶ θαυμαστὰ τὰ ἔργα σου, ὃ
ἐπαναλαμβάνει τρίς, καὶ πᾶσαν δὲ ἐπανάληψιν οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι τὸ

------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. [Ὁ Βιολάκης ἔχει λανθασμένως τὸν ἀριθμὸν 4.] Ἐν τισι μέρεσιν ἤρξατο ἡ συνήθεια
τοῦ τελεῖν τὸν Ἁγιασμὸν μετὰ τὸ τέλος τῆς Λειτουργίας, τὸ μὲν διότι ἐγίνετο διακοπή
τις μετὰ τὸν Ἁγιασμὸν καὶ οἱ πλείους τῶν ἐκκλησιαζομένων ἀνεχώρουν, τὸ δὲ καὶ ὅτι
μέγα μέρος τοῦ λαοῦ καθυστεροῦν ἐστερεῖτο τῆς τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ τελετῆς.

*(Printed Page 310)*

=== LEAF p326 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 6 Matins Concluded & Great Blessing of the Waters Opening (p. 311)]

311

        [Today the Master receives baptism at the hand of the
Forerunner.]*
        Glory, Magnify, O my soul, the power of the undivided Godhead
in three Persons.
        Now and ever, Magnify, O my soul, her that has delivered us
from the curse.

* [Note: The above Megalynaria, enclosed in brackets and marked with an asterisk, are found
in the Mineon (ed. Fos, 1960 and ed. Apostoliki Diakonia, 1991); they are not found in the
Typikon nor in the rubrics from the Typikon reprinted in the Mineon.]

    The Exapostilarion (3 times). At the Praises: the Idiomela “Light
from Light (in 6), Glory, “O Savior, who clothed Yourself with the waters
of Jordan,” Now and ever, “Today Christ” and the Great Doxology.
    [In the Great Doxology, the usual first line is replaced by the last line
of the Theotokion "we who have been enlightened cry aloud: Glory, to God
made manifest, Who has appeared upon earth and brought light to the
world.]
    In the Great Doxology, after the phrase “Holy Immortal, have
mercy on us” of the Trisagion, we sing the 3 Idiomela of the Blessing of the
Waters¹ “The voice of the Lord upon the waters.” Glory, Now and ever, “At
the voice of one crying in the wilderness.” While these hymns are being
sung, the Priest exits from the Royal Gate holding the Precious Cross,
preceded by the candle bearers and the Deacons. The Patriarch (or
Archpriest), wearing the Epitrachilion and Small Omoforion, descends
from the Throne and comes to the middle of the Church, where the table with
the bowl of water has been placed. At the conclusion of the Idiomela, the
Canonarch or the Deacon reads the 3 Prophecies of the Blessing of the
Waters and then follows the Apostolos; the Patriarch [recites] the Gospel;
after “Many years,” the Great Archdeacon chants the Great Litany of the
Blessing of the Waters Service. In the meanwhile, the Patriarch reads
inaudibly the Prayer “O Lord Jesus Christ”; at the conclusion of the Prayer
and the Litany, he exclaims “O Trinity supreme in being,” adding at the end
the Prayer “Great are you, O Lord, and marvellous are Your works,” which
is repeated three times, while at each repetition the Choirs chant “Glory to

------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. {Violakis erroneously numbers this footnote as number 4.} In some places the custom has
developed of celebrating the Blessing of the Waters at the conclusion of the Liturgy, on the one
hand because there was great disorder after the Blessing and many of those in Church departed,
[and] on the other hand because many of the people, by arriving late, deprived themselves of the
service of the Blessing of the Waters.

*(Printed Page 311)*

=== LEAF p327 ===
[Original Greek Text: Great Blessing of the Waters Concluded & Divine Liturgy Antiphons 1 & 2 (§ 4) (p. 312)]

312

Δόξα σοι Κύριε δόξα σοι· μετὰ τὸ τέλος τῆς Εὐχῆς βαπτίζει
τὸν τίμιον Σταυρὸν μετὰ τοῦ ἁγιαστῆρος ἐν τῷ δοχείῳ, εἰς τρεῖς
ἀναδύσεις καὶ καταδύσεις ψάλλων τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ βαπτιζομένου
σου Κύριε, ὅπερ ἐπαναλαμβάνουσι καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ἀνὰ μίαν, εἶτα
ἁγιάζων σταυροειδῶς τὸν λαὸν καὶ ψάλλων τὸ Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον
τῇ οἰκουμένῃ, ἀνέρχεται εἰς τὸν Θρόνον, τῶν Χορῶν ψαλλόντων
τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη· ἁγιαζομένων δὲ τῶν Ἀρχιερέων καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν
κληρικῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ Πατριάρχου, οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσιν ἐναλλὰξ ἀργῶς
καὶ μετὰ μέλους τὸ Τροπάριον τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς Τριάδος ἡ
φανέρωσις, ἄχρις οὗ ἁγιασθῶσι πάντες, εἶτα ὁ β΄ Χορὸς τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου.

4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα.

                      Ἀντίφωνον α΄. Ἦχος β΄.

        Ἐν ἐξόδῳ Ἰσραὴλ ἐξ Αἰγύπτου,
οἴκου Ἰακώβ.
        Ἐγενήθη Ἰουδαία ἁγίασμα αὐτοῦ.
        Ἡ θάλασσα εἶδε καὶ ἔφυγεν· ὁ
Ἰορδάνης ἐστράφη εἰς τὰ ὀπίσω.
        Τί σοί ἐστι θάλασσα, ὅτι ἔφυγες;
καὶ σὺ Ἰορδάνη, ὅτι ἐστράφης εἰς τὰ ὀπίσω;

        Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου κτλ.

                      Ἀντίφωνον β΄. Ἦχος β΄.

        Ἠγάπησα, ὅτι εἰσακούσεται Κύριος
τῆς φωνῆς τῆς δεήσεώς μου.
        Ὅτι ἔκλινε τὸ οὖς αὐτοῦ ἐμοί, καὶ ἐν
ταῖς ἡμέραις μου ἐπικαλέσομαι.
        Περιέσχον με ὠδῖνες θανάτου, κίνδυνοι
ᾅδου εὕροσάν με.
        Ἐλεήμων ὁ Κύριος καὶ δίκαιος, καὶ ὁ

*(Printed Page 312)*

=== LEAF p328 ===
[English Facing Translation: Great Blessing of the Waters Concluded & Divine Liturgy Antiphons 1 & 2 (§ 4) (p. 313)]

313

You, O Lord, glory to You.” At the end of the prayer, he takes the Precious
Cross and immerses it with the sprinkler into the water and then lifts it from
the water. There are three immersions and at each immersion “When You,
O Lord, were baptized in the Jordan” is sung, the first time by the Patriarch
and once by each of the Choirs. Then the Patriarch blesses the people in a
crosslike manner; singing “You have appeared today to the universe,” he
returns to the Throne, the Choirs singing “Many years,” while the rest of the
Hierarchs and the other clergy are sprinkle-anointed by the Patriarch. The
Choirs alternately sing with a slow melody the Hymn of the 8th Ode “The
Trinity was made manifest” until all have been sprinkled; then the second
Choir chants the Apolytikion “When You, O Lord, were baptized in the
Jordan,” and the Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom begins.
4.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

                       Antiphon 1. Mode II

        When Israel went out of Egypt, the
house of Jacob
        Judah became His sanctuary,
and Israel His dominion.
        The sea saw it and fled;
Jordan turned back.
        What ails you, O sea, that you
fled? And You, Jordan, that you turned back?

        Glory, now and ever, Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,
etc.

                       Antiphon 2. Mode II

        I love the Lord, because He has heard
my voice and my supplications.
        Because He has inclined His ear to me,
I will call upon Him as long as I live.
        The pains of death surrounded me, and
the pangs of Sheol laid hold of me; I found
trouble and sorrow.
        Gracious is the Lord, and

*(Printed Page 313)*

=== LEAF p329 ===
[Original Greek Text: Liturgy Antiphons Concluded (§ 4) & Synaxis of St. John the Baptist Vespers (§ 5) (p. 314)]

314

Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐλεεῖ.

        Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ Μονογενὴς κτλ.

                      Ἀντίφωνον γ΄. Ἦχος α΄.

        Ἐξομολογεῖσθε τῷ Κυρίῳ, ὅτι ἀγαθός,
ὅτι εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ.
        Εἰπάτω δὴ οἶκος Ἰσραήλ, ὅτι ἀγαθός,
ὅτι εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ.
        Εἰπάτω δὴ οἶκος Ἀαρών, ὅτι ἀγαθός,
ὅτι εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ.
        Εἰπάτωσαν δὴ πάντες οἱ φοβούμενοι
τὸν Κύριον, ὅτι ἀγαθός, ὅτι εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα
τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ.
    Εἰσοδικόν Εὐλογημένος ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου,
Θεὸς Κύριος καὶ ἐπέφανεν ἡμῖν. Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . κτλ, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἐπεφάνης
σήμερον· ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου, ψάλλεται τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν
ἐβαπτίσθητε, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς
τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου τὴν τιμιωτέραν καὶ
ἐνδοξοτέραν τῶν ἄνω στρατευμάτων Ἀπορεῖ πᾶσα γλῶσσα,
Κοινωνικὸν Ἐπεφάνη ἡ χάρις τοῦ Θεοῦ· ἀντὶ τοῦ Εἴδομεν
τὸ φῶς, λέγεται τὸ Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

                 Ἡ Σύναξις τοῦ τιμίου Προδρόμου.

5.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ
Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ψάλλομεν Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς Τὸν φωτισμὸν ἡμῶν
γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου Προσόμοια Πανεύφημε Πρόδρομε Χριστοῦ γ΄,
Δόξα, Ἔνσαρκε λύχνε, Καὶ νῦν, Θεὸς λόγος ἐπεφάνη ἐν σαρκί,
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Μ. Προκείμενον Ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ
οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ, μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα,
τὰ γ΄ Στιχηρὰ Προσόμοια Ὡς εἶδε σε Δέσποτα καὶ τὰ ἕτερα β΄, Δόξα,
Ὡς τοῦ Πνεύματος ἐραστής, Καὶ νῦν, Δεῦτε μιμησώμεθα,
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ, τὸ τοῦ Προδρόμου Μνήμη δικαίου

*(Printed Page 314)*

=== LEAF p330 ===
[English Facing Translation: Liturgy Antiphons Concluded (§ 4) & Synaxis of St. John the Baptist Vespers (§ 5) (p. 315)]

315

righteous; Yes, our God is merciful.

        Glory, [to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit,] now and
ever [and to the ages of ages. Amen.] Only begotten [Son and Word of
God, ....]

                      Antiphon 3 Mode 1.

        O give thanks to the Lord,
for He is good! For His mercy endures
forever!
        Let Israel now say, “His mercy
endures forever!”
        Let the house of Aaron now say,
“His mercy endures forever!”
        Let those who fear the LORD
now say, “His mercy endures forever!”
    Entrance Hymn: “Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the
Lord; the Lord is God and has appeared unto us. Save us, O Son of God,
Who was baptized by John in the Jordan, etc.” The Apolytikion “When
You, O Lord, were baptized in Jordan,” and the Kontakion “You have
appeared today to the universe”; instead of the Trisagios Hymn we sing
“All those who have been baptized in Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia.”
The Apostolos and the Gospel of the Feast. At “Especially,” “Magnify, O
my soul, her who is greater in honor than the hosts on high. Every tongue
is at a loss.” Communion Hymn “The grace of God became manifest
today”; instead of “We have seen the [true] light” we sing “When You, O
Lord, were baptized in Jordan,” and Dismissal.

         The Synaxis in Honor of the Honorable Forerunner.

5.    That Friday evening, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have
cried” we sing the 3 Idiomela of the Feast, and the 3 Prosomia of the
Forerunner “O renowned Forerunner of Christ,” Glory, “You Light in the
flesh,” Now and ever, “God the Word appeared to mankind in the flesh.”
Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Great Prokimenon “Our God in
heaven and earth” with its Verses. At the Aposticha: the 3 Stichira
Prosomia “When he saw You, O Master” and the other two, Glory, “As the
lover of the Spirit,” Now and ever, “Come, let us imitate the wise virgins.”
The Apolytikion “When You, O Lord, were baptized in Jordan,” then the

*(Printed Page 315)*
