=== LEAF p171 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 7 Liturgy Concl. / September 8: Nativity of the Theotokos — Vespers & Matins (p. 156)]

156

Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Η΄. Τὸ Γενέσιον τῆς Ὑπεραγίας ἡμῶν Θεοτόκου καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας.

4. Ἐν τῷ Μεγάλῳ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν Α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Σήμερον ὁ τοῖς νοεροῖς θρόνοις εἰς ς΄, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Ἡ παγκόσμιος χαρὰ κτλ. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Δεῦτε ἅπαντες πιστοί, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου θεοτόκε ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

5. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς τὸ Τρισάγιον καὶ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ψάλλεται ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον αὖθις, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία μου, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν ἐκ δευτέρου οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός σου, Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριὰμ ὁ Ν χῦμα, Δόξα Ταῖς τῆς θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Αὕτη ἡμέρα Κυρίου·* οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι μετὰ στίχου Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε, σῶσον ἡμᾶς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Πύλην κεκλεισμένην ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας, καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδή, ἡ Καταβασία Μυστικὸς εἶ θεοτόκε εἶτα τὰ β΄ Ἐξαποστειλάρια. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τά Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Αὕτη ἡμέρα Κυρίου Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.

*(Printed Page 156)*

=== LEAF p172 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 7 Liturgy Concl. / September 8: Nativity of the Theotokos — Vespers & Matins (p. 157)]

157

“Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 8th. The Birth of our All-Holy Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary.

4. In Great Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the First Stasis of the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 6 Idiomela Stichira “Today God who rests on the intellectual thrones,” Glory, Now and ever, “Today God who rests on the intellectual thrones.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela Stichira “The universal joy” etc., Glory, Now and ever, “Come, all you faithful.” The Apolytikion “Your birth, O Theotokos” 3 times, and Dismissal.

5. At Matins after “Blessed is our God,” the Trisagion and Psalm 50, the Liti is sung, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion three times, the Psalter and the Polyeleos “My heart overflows.” The Kathismata in order twice each, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon “I will commemorate your name.” Then “Let everything that has breath,” and the Gospel “And Mary arose”; Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “At the intercessions of the Theotokos,” Now and ever, repeat the same. Then the Verse “Have mercy upon me” and the Idiomelon “This is the day of the Lord.”* Both Canons with the Verse “Most Holy Theotokos, save us.” After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “The closed gate”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and then the 9th Ode is sung with the Katavasia “O Theotokos, you are a mystical Paradise.” Then the two Exapostilaria. At the Praises: the Prosomia in 4, Glory, Now and ever, “This is the day of the Lord,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.

*(Printed Page 157)*

=== LEAF p173 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 8: Nativity of the Theotokos — Divine Liturgy Antiphons & Rites (p. 158)]

158

6. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα.

Ἀντίφωνον α΄.

Μνήσθητι Κύριε τοῦ Δαβὶδ καὶ πάσης τῆς πραότητος αὐτοῦ.
Ἰδοὺ ἠκούσαμεν αὐτὴν ἐν Ἐφραθά, εὕρομεν αὐτὴν ἐν τοῖς πεδίοις τοῦ δρυμοῦ.
Δεδοξασμένα ἐλαλήθη περὶ σοῦ ἡ πόλις τοῦ θεοῦ.
Ὁ Θεὸς ἐν μέσῳ αὐτῆς καὶ οὐ σαλευθήσεται.

Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς θεοτόκου κτλ.

Ἀντίφωνον β΄.

Ὤμοσε Κύριος τῷ Δαβὶδ ἀλήθειαν καὶ οὐ μὴ ἀθετήσει αὐτήν.
Ἐκ καρποῦ τῆς κοιλίας σου, θήσομαι ἐπὶ τοῦ θρόνου σου.
Ἐκεῖ ἐξανατελῶ κέρας τῷ Δαβίδ, ἡτοίμασα λύχνον τῷ Χριστῷ μου.
Ὅτι ἐξελέξατο Κύριος τὴν Σιών, ᾑρετίσατο αὐτὴν εἰς κατοικίαν ἑαυτῷ.

Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστὸς κτλ.

Ἀντίφωνον γ΄.

Ὧδε κατοικήσω, ὅτι ᾑρετισάμην αὐτήν.
Ἡγίασε τὸ σκήνωμα αὐτοῦ ὁ Ὕψιστος.
Ἅγιος ὁ ναός σου, θαυμαστὸς ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ.

Ἡ γέννησίς σου θεοτόκε κτλ.

Εἰς τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν ... , ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἡ γέννησίς σου θεοτόκε, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ Ἄννα· ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἀλλότριον τῶν Μητέρων ἡ Παρθενία· Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον σωτηρίου, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 158)*

=== LEAF p174 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 8: Nativity of the Theotokos — Divine Liturgy Antiphons & Rites (p. 159)]

159

6. In the Liturgy, the Antiphons.

Antiphon 1.

Lord, remember David
    and all his meekness.
Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in
    the field of the wood.
Glorious things are spoken of you,
    O city of God.
God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved:
    God shall help her, and that right early.

“Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, etc.”

Antiphon 2.

The Lord has sworn in truth unto David;
    and He will not turn from it.
Of the fruit of your body will I set
    upon your throne.
There will I make the horn of David to bud:
    I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed.
For the Lord has chosen Zion:
    He has desired it for His habitation.

“Save us, O Son of God, Who are wondrous among your Saints, etc.”

Antiphon 3.

Here will I dwell: for I have desired it.
The Most High has sanctified
    His tabernacle.
Holy is Your temple, and wonderful
    in righteousness.

“Your birth, O Theotokos, etc.”

At the Entrance: “O come let us worship and bow down to Christ. O Son of God, wonderful in Your saints, save us who sing to You: Alleluia.” The Apolytikion “Your birth, O Theotokos” and the Kontakion “Joachim and Anna,” the Apostolos and the Gospel. At “Especially,” “Virginity is alien to motherhood,” Communion Hymn “I will receive the cup of salvation,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 159)*

=== LEAF p175 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 8 on Sunday / September 9: Ancestors of God Joachim and Anna (p. 160)]

160

7. Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς ς΄, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον ὁ τοῖς νοεροῖς θρόνοις· Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Δεῦτε ἅπαντες πιστοί, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

8. Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία μου, εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν Καθίσματα Ἀναστάσιμα β΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀναβόησον Δαβίδ, εἰς τὴν β΄ ὡσαύτως Ἀναστάσιμα β΄ καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης Ἰεσσαί, τὸ δὲ γ΄ Κάθισμα ἐκ δευτέρου, καὶ εὐθὺς ἡ Αἴτησις, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ καὶ οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἑορτῆς Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός σου, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἀναστᾶσα Μαριάμ, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ θεασάμενοι καὶ ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, Δόξα Ταῖς τῆς θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἡ παγκόσμιος χαρά, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ οἱ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ στίχου Ὑπεραγία θεοτόκε· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἡ Παρθένος Μαριάμ, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ψάλλονται αἱ δύο τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδαὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τοῦ στίχου Ὑπεραγία θεοτόκε· Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα Αὕτη ἡμέρα Κυρίου. Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

9. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τα Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ Ἄννα, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἀλλότριον τῶν μητέρων ἡ παρθενία, Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον σωτηρίου, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Θ΄. Τῶν ἁγίων καὶ δικαίων Θεοπατόρων Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ Ἄννης.

*(Printed Page 160)*

=== LEAF p176 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 8 on Sunday / September 9: Ancestors of God Joachim and Anna (p. 161)]

161

7. If the Feast occurs on Sunday, on Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira and 6 Idiomela Stichira of the Feast, Glory, Now and ever, “Today God who rests on the intellectual thrones.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “Come, all you faithful”; the Resurrection Apolytikion and that of the Feast twice, and Dismissal.

8. On Sunday, at Matins after Psalm 50 the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Feast and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos “My heart overflows.” At the first Stichologia, 2 Resurrection Kathismata and that of the Feast “Cry out, O David”; at the second, likewise 2 Resurrection Kathismata and that of the Feast “From the root of Jesse,” the third Kathisma twice, and immediately the Petition, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon of the Feast “I will commemorate your name.” Then “Let everything that has breath,” and the Gospel “And Mary arose”; then “Having beheld Christ’s Resurrection,” Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “At the intercessions of the Theotokos,” Now and ever, repeat the same hymn. Then the Verse “Have mercy upon me” and the Idiomelon “The universal joy.” The Canons of the Resurrection and both Canons of the Feast with the Verse “Most Holy Theotokos, save us.” After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos (read), then the Kathisma of the Feast “The Virgin Mary”; after the 6th Ode the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast and the Minologion. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the 9th Ode of both Canons of the Feast are sung with the Verse “Most Holy Theotokos, save us.” Then the Resurrection Exapostilarion and the two Exapostilaria of the Feast are sung. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and the 4 Stichira of the Feast, Glory, “This is the day of the Lord,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

9. In the Liturgy the Antiphons of the Feast with “who is risen from the dead.” After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, and the Kontakion “Joachim and Anna.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before the Elevation. At “Especially,” “Virginity is alien to motherhood.” Communion Hymn “I will receive the cup of salvation,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 9th. The Holy and Righteous Ancestors Joachim and Anna.

*(Printed Page 161)*

=== LEAF p177 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 9: Ancestors of God Joachim & Anna / Sunday after Feast (p. 162)]

162

10. Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἁγίων ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτῶν ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων.
    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων Δεῦτε νῦν χορεύσωμεν δ΄, Δόξα Ὦ μακαρία δυάς, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν Οἱ ἐξ ἀκάρπων λαγόνων, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῶν Ἁγίων Ἡ γέννησίς σου θεοτόκε καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

11. Τῇ Κυριακῇ μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ὁ Τριαδικὸς Κανὼν καὶ τὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῶν Ἁγίων Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ ἡ Ἄννα πανηγυρίζουσιν· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀδὰμ ἀνακαινίσθητι. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄ Χάρις τῷ Λυτρωτῇ, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

12. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῶν Ἁγίων, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἰωακεὶμ καὶ Ἄννα· Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

13. [Τῇ] Κυριακῇ μετὰ τὴν ἑορτήν· τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ μεθέορτα τῆς σειρᾶς δ΄, Δόξα τὸ τῆς Λιτῆς τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν ἐκ τῶν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ

*(Printed Page 162)*

=== LEAF p178 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 9: Ancestors of God Joachim & Anna / Sunday after Feast (p. 163)]

163

10. If the commemoration of the Saints occurs on any day other than Sunday, the Service is chanted as prescribed in the Mineon together with the hymns of the Post-feast.
    If the Feast occurs on Sunday, Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Saints, “Come now let us dance,” Glory, “O blessed couple,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “From unfruitful loins”; the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saints “Your birth, O Theotokos,” and Dismissal.

11. On Sunday, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the “It is meet,” the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saints, and that of the Feast, the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saints “Joachim and Anna celebrate”; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” The Resurrection Exapostilarion and that of the Feast “Be renewed, O Adam.” At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and the 4 Stichira of the Post-feast “By grace of the Saviour,” Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”

12. In the Liturgy, the Typika, and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saints. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Saints, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Joachim and Anna”; Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before the Elevation. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

13. On the Sunday after the Feast: Saturday in Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Post-feast, Glory of the Liti of the Feast, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever of the Feast; the Resurrection Apolytikion,

*(Printed Page 163)*

=== LEAF p179 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — Sunday after Nativity / September 12: Apodosis of the Nativity of the Theotokos (p. 164)]

164

Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

14. Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὸ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ· τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος. Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ β΄ στιχολογοῦμεν ἀνὰ β΄ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ ἀνὰ α΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα μεθέορτον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ μεθέορτον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. Σήμερον σωτηρία καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία μετὰ τῶν Τυπικῶν καὶ Μακαρισμῶν (ἐν οἷς δ΄ ἐκ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς), ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΙΒ΄. Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς.

15. Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Ἀπόδοσις ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐν τῇ ἰδίᾳ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἡμέρᾳ, ἐξαιρουμένων ἐν μὲν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου καὶ τῶν Ἀναγνωσμάτων, ἐν δὲ τῷ Ὄρθρῳ τῆς Λιτῆς, τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου τοῦ Ὄρθρου καὶ τοῦ Πολυελέου· ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ, λέγεται Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας.

16. Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Ἀπόδοσις ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς ς΄. Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν τὸ τῶν Ἀποστίχων τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δὶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

17. Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ

*(Printed Page 164)*

=== LEAF p180 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — Sunday after Nativity / September 12: Apodosis of the Nativity of the Theotokos (p. 165)]

165

then the Feast’s Apolytikion once, and Dismissal.

14. On Sunday in Matins after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion twice, and that of the Feast once; the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Post-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” The Resurrection Exapostilarion and that of the Post-feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and the 4 Stichira of the Post-feast, Glory the Eothinon Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.” Then follows the Liturgy, with the Typika, and the Beatitudes (in which we sing 4 hymns of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast), Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before the Elevation, Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 12th. The Apodosis [Leave-taking] of the Feast.

15. If the Leave-taking occurs on any day other than Sunday, the Service is chanted as on the day of the Feast, with the following exceptions. In Vespers: of the Psalter and the Readings; in Matins: of the Liti, the Gospel of Matins and the Polyeleos. In the Liturgy, we do the Apostolos and Gospel of the day.

16. If the Leave-taking occurs on a Sunday, then on Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira and 6 Stichira of the Feast, Glory of the Feast, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever of the Aposticha of the Feast; the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast twice, and Dismissal.

17. On Sunday at Matins after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter of the day and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and those of the

*(Printed Page 165)*
