=== LEAF p521 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation I Concl. (§§ 2–3) and General Rubric (p. 506)]

506

μετὰ τὴν Συναπτὴν οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Δικαίως ὡς φοῖνιξ ἀνθήσει, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Προσέχετε ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ ἅπαξ, καὶ εὐθὺς Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ Ἀθλοφόρου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τοῦ μεγάλου Βασιλέως (ζήτει εἰς τὴν Λιτήν)· [Εἰς τὴν Περίπτωσιν Δ΄ § 11, εἰς τὸ ἴδιον μέρος τῆς ἀκολουθίας, ὁ Βιολάκης ἔχει ὡς Ἰδιόμελον Σήμερον ἡ οἰκουμένη πᾶσα.] Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν σου, Κύριε ἐλέησον ιβ΄, Ἐλέει καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς, καὶ ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου ἀνὰ δ΄ μετὰ Στίχου εἰς μὲν τὸν Ἀναστάσιμον Δόξα τῇ ἁγίᾳ Ἀναστάσει σου Κύριε, εἰς δὲ τὸν τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ πρέσβευε ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν· ἐν τῷ τέλει ἑκάστης Ὠδῆς ἡ Καταβασία, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρίς, Ἀναστὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἅπαξ, καὶ ἡ Αἴτησις· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον {τοῦ Πάσχα}· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ γ΄, καὶ τὸ Ἀναστὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς· εἶτα μετὰ τὴν ζ΄ καὶ η΄ Ὠδὴν ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Πάσχα, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου Ἔαρ ἡμῖν ἐξέλαμψεν, αὖθις τὸ πρῶτον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄ καὶ τὰ Στιχηρὰ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα, Ἀνέτειλε τὸ ἔαρ, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρίς, καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.

3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐν Ἐκκλησίαις εὐλογεῖτε τὸν Θεόν, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι τὸν Ὄρθρον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Πάσχα, τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, ὁ Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας Θεὸν οὐδεὶς ἑώρακε πώποτε. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον¹, Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

    Κατ᾿ αὐτὸν τὸν τύπον ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου, ὅταν συμπέσῃ ἡ μνήμη αὐτοῦ τῇ Τρίτῃ, Τετάρτῃ, Πέμπτῃ καὶ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Διακαινησίμου· ἐξαιρεῖται δὲ μόνον τὸ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Πάσχα ἀναγινωσκόμενον Εὐαγγέλιον, ἀλλ᾿ ἀναγινώσκονται ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου.

1. Ἐὰν ὁ Ναὸς τιμᾶται ἐπ᾿ ὀνόματι τοῦ Ἁγίου [Γεωργίου.] {Ἄλλως τὸ Κοινωνικὸν εἶναι τὸ Σῶμα Χριστοῦ· ἰδὲ ἐπίσης Τάξις τοῦ Πατριαρχείου, 1998, σελ. 291.}

*(Printed Page 506)*

=== LEAF p522 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation One Concl. (§§ 2–3) and General Rubric (p. 507)]

507

we chant the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “The righteous shall flourish.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Gospel “Be careful of men” [Luke 21:12-19]. Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ” once, and immediately Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Champion,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God have mercy on me” and the Idiomelon “The Great King” (look in the Liti). {In Situation 4, Paragraph 11, at the same place in the service, Violakis has as the Idiomelon “Today, the whole world.”} Then “O God, save Your people,” “Lord, have mercy” (12 times), “Through the mercy and compassion,” and the Canon of Pascha and that of the Saint with four hymns, with the Verse for the Resurrection Canon “Glory to Your Resurrection, O Lord,” and for the Canon of the Saint, the Verse “Holy One of God, intercede for us”; at the end of each Ode the Katavasia “Christ is risen” (3 times), “Having arisen from the grave” (once) and the Petition. After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi of Pascha and the Kontakion {of Pascha}. After the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the Minologion. Then “Having beheld the Resurrection” 3 times, and “Having risen from the grave.” After the 7th and 8th Odes, the 9th Ode of Pascha with the Megalynaria and those of the Saint. The Exapostilarion of Easter, that of the Saint “Springtime has shone forth” and again the Exapostilarion of Easter. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira, and 4 of the Saint and the Stichira “A sacred Pascha,” Glory, “Spring has dawned,” Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” “Christ is risen” 3 times; and the Liturgy begins.

3.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of Pascha, and the Entrance Hymn “In the congregations bless God.” “Christ is risen,” the Ypakoi “Mary came before dawn,” the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Kontakion of Pascha. Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, “As many as have been baptized,” the Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the day “No man has seen God at any time” [John 1:18-28]. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried out,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial”¹ “Christ is risen” and Dismissal.

    The service of the Saint is celebrated in this manner when his Feast falls on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday of Bright Week; however, instead of the Gospel read at the Vespers of Sunday, we read the Readings of the Saint.

1. If the Church is named in honor of [Saint George.] {Otherwise, the Communion Hymn is “Body of Christ.” See also the 1998 Taxis of the Patriarchate, page 291.}

*(Printed Page 507)*

=== LEAF p523 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation II (§§ 4–6) Bright Friday (Life-Giving Spring) (p. 508)]

508

Β΄.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς Διακαινησίμου, τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ γ΄, τῆς Θεοτόκου γ΄, καὶ δ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Τίς λαλήσει τὰς δυναστείας σου Πηγή, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἀγαπήσω σε Κύριε ἡ ἰσχύς μου μετὰ τῶν Στίχων, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Στιχηρὸν Τὴν Ἀνάστασίν σου Χριστὲ Σωτήρ, καὶ τὰ γ΄ ἀπόστιχα Στιχηρὰ τῆς Θεοτόκου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

5.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ἡ Ἀκολουθία μέχρι τῶν Κανόνων ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν ἐν § 2 διάταξιν, οἱ Κανόνες τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ οἱ τῆς Θεοτόκου μετὰ Στίχων, εἰς μὲν τὸν Ἀναστάσιμον Δόξα τῇ Ἁγίᾳ Ἀναστάσει σου, εἰς τὸν τοῦ Ἁγίου, Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ, καί εἰς τὸν τῆς Θεοτόκου Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Προλαβοῦσαι τὸν Ὄρθρον, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς Θεοτόκου· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Θεοτόκου· μετὰ τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ γ΄, μετὰ καὶ τὴν ζ΄ καὶ η΄ Ὠδὴν ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῶν Μεγαλυναρίων, ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ ἡ τῆς Θεοτόκου μετὰ Στίχου Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε, τὰ Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ Πάσχα, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς Θεοτόκου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα β΄, τῆς Θεοτόκου γ΄, τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄ καὶ τὸ Πάσχα ἱερόν. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀναστάσεως ἡμέρα, καὶ τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη γ΄.

6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, Ἀντίφωνα καὶ Εἰσοδικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, ἡ Ὑπακοή, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἐξ ἀκενώτου σου πηγῆς καὶ τὸ Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα. Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον,* Χριστὸς ἀνέστη καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

* [Πιθανὸν οἱ ἴδιοι κανόνες ποὺ ἁρμόζουν εἰς τὴν ὑπόλοιπον ἑβδομάδα ἁρμόζουν καὶ ἐδῶ· δηλ. ἐὰν ὁ ναὸς ὅπου γίνεται ἡ λειτουργία εἶναι ἀφιερωμένη εἰς τὸν Ἅγιον Γεώργιον τότε ψάλλομεν Εἰς μνημόσυνον αἰώνιον, ἐὰν ὄχι, τότε τὸ Κοινωνικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα Σῶμα Χριστοῦ.]

*(Printed Page 508)*

=== LEAF p524 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation Two (§§ 4–6) Bright Friday (Life-Giving Spring) (p. 509)]

509

SITUATION TWO

4.    If the Feast [of the Saint] falls on Friday of Bright Week, on Thursday evening, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the three Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Theotokos, and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “Who can tell of your mighty deeds, O Life-giving Spring.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon “I will love You, O Lord” with its verses, and the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichiron “Your Resurrection, Christ Savior” and the three Aposticha Stichira of the Theotokos, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” “Christ is risen” once, the Apolytikion of the Saint, and again “Christ is risen,” and the Dismissal.

5.    On Friday at Matins, the Service up to the Canons is sung according to the order of Paragraph 2, the Canons of Pascha, those of the Saint and of the Theotokos, with the Verse for the Resurrection Canon “Glory to Your Resurrection, O Lord,” for the Canon of the Saint, the Verse “Holy One of God, intercede for us,” and for the Theotokos “Most Holy Theotokos.” After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “Mary came before dawn” then the Kathisma of the Saint and that of the Theotokos; after the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the Minologion, and the Postscript of the Theotokos. Then “Having beheld the Resurrection” 3 times. After the 7th and 8th Ode we chant the 9th Ode of Pascha with the Megalynaria, that of the Saint, and that of the Theotokos with the Verse “Most Holy Theotokos.” The Exapostilaria: of Pascha, of the Saint, and of the Theotokos. At the Praises: 2 Resurrection Stichira, 3 of the Theotokos, 3 of the Saint and “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “It is the day of Resurrection,” and “Christ is risen” 3 times.

6.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha; after the Entrance, “Christ is risen,” the Ypakoi, the Apolytikion of the Saint, the Kontakion “From your unfailing fount” and “Though You went down into the tomb,” the Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel of the day [John 2:12-22]. At “Especially,” “The Angel cried out,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial”* “Christ is risen” and Dismissal.

* {It is possible that the same rules that apply to the rest of the week apply here as well: That is, if the church in which the Liturgy is being celebrated is dedicated to Saint George, then we sing “In eternal memorial,” and if not, then we sing the Communion Hymn of Pascha “Body of Christ.”}

*(Printed Page 509)*

=== LEAF p525 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation III (§§ 7–9) Thomas Sunday & Situation IV Opening (§ 10) (p. 510)]

510

Γ΄.

7.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τοῦ Θωμᾶ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη τρίς, ὁ Προοιμιακὸς καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου· τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

8.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων· οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Ἐπαίνει Ἱερουσαλὴμ τὸν Κύριον, καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἄνευ Στίχου, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου μετὰ Στίχου Ἅγιε τοῦ Θεοῦ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Ὡς ἐν μέσῳ τῶν μαθητῶν σου, τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου χῦμα· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὡς καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου ἀνὰ δ΄, τὸ Ἅγιος Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δίς, Ὑψοῦτε Κύριον τὸν Θεὸν ἡμῶν κτλ. καὶ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ἐμῶν μελῶν χειρί σου, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα, Ἀνέτειλε τὸ ἔαρ, Καὶ νῦν, Μεθ᾿ ἡμέρας ὀκτώ, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.

9.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου· Κοντάκιον Εἰ καὶ ἐν τάφῳ· Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Οὔσης ὀψίας. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Σὲ τὴν φαεινὴν λαμπάδα, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐπαίνει Ἱερουσαλήμ, τὸ Χριστὸς Ἀνέστη, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Δ΄.

10.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς τοῦ Θωμᾶ ἑβδομάδος, τῇ Κυριακῇ

*(Printed Page 510)*

=== LEAF p526 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation Three (§§ 7–9) Thomas Sunday & Situation Four Opening (§ 10) (p. 511)]

511

SITUATION THREE

7.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Sunday of Thomas, Saturday evening, after Christ is risen (3 times,) and the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the six Stichira of the Feast and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon “The Lord is King,” and the Readings of the Saint. The Aposticha of the Feast, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saint, and again that of the Feast, and the Dismissal.

8.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Feast, and of the Saint; Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast, and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata of the Saint, and one Kathisma of the Feast instead of a Theotokion; the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem,” and immediately the Canon of the Feast without verses, that of the Saint with the Verse “Holy One of God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi “Even as you came in the midst of the disciples,” the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint (read); after the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, the Minologion, and the Postscript of the Feast. The Katavasie of Pascha and the entire order of the Matins Gospel, then the 9th Ode of the Feast and that of the Saint with four hymns each. “Holy is the Lord our God” twice, then “Exalt the Lord our God,” etc. The Exapostilarion “With your hand you have searched out,” that of the Saint, and the other of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Saint, Glory, “Spring has dawned,” Now and ever, “Eight days after Your arising,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.

9.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha; after the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, the Apolytikion of the Saint, the Kontakion “Though You went down into the tomb,” the Apostolos of the Saint and the Gospel “When it was evening” [John 20:19-31]. At “Especially,” “You, the shining lamp,” Communion Hymn “Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem,” “Christ is risen” and Dismissal.

SITUATION FOUR

10.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Monday of Thomas, on

*(Printed Page 511)*

=== LEAF p527 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation IV Concl. (§§ 10–12) & Situation V Opening (§ 13) (p. 512)]

512

ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Προσόμοια τῆς σειρᾶς β΄ (δηλ. ἐκ τοῦ Πεντηκοσταρίου) καὶ ς΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Τῶν θυρῶν κεκλεισμένων, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὢ τοῦ παραδόξου θαύματος (ζήτει εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῆς ἑορτῆς), τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

11.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου δὶς καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καθίσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων· οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Δικαίως ὡς φοῖνιξ ἀνθήσει, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ θεασάμενοι, καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τοῦ Ἀθλοφόρου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Σήμερον ἡ οἰκουμένη πᾶσα, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα· εἶτα Στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, ἡ Καταβασία Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου Προσόμοια, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἁγίου.

12.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῇ φιλοπράγμονι δεξιᾷ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς μνημόσυνον, Χριστὸς Ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις².

Ε΄.

13.    Εἰ τύχοι τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῇ

2. Κατ᾿ αὐτὸν τὸν τύπον ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ ἐν ταῖς λοιπαῖς τῆς ἑβδομάδος ταύτης ἡμέραις μέχρι τῆς Παρασκευῆς, πλὴν τοῦ ὅτι ἐν αὐταῖς στιχολογεῖται ἡ α΄ Στάσις τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου· εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα μόνον τὰ ς΄ Στιχηρὰ τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὰ Προκείμενα ἑκάστης ἡμέρας.

*(Printed Page 512)*

=== LEAF p528 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation Four Concl. (§§ 10–12) & Situation Five Opening (§ 13) (p. 513)]

513

Sunday evening, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing two Stichira of the sequence {i.e. from the Pentikostarion} and 6 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “The doors being closed.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon “Our God in heaven and on the earth” with its verses and the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “O, of the strange wonder,” (look in the Aposticha of the Feast). The Apolytikion of the Saint, that of the Feast, and the Dismissal.

11.    On Monday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint, Glory, Now and ever of the Feast, and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Saint and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion of the Saint twice, and of the Feast once, the Psalter of the day and the Polyeleos of the Saint. Kathismata of the Saint and one of the Feast in place of the Theotokia; the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon “The righteous shall flourish.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the Matins Gospel of the Saint. Then the “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ,” Psalm 50 read. Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Champion,” Now and ever, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “O God, have mercy on me” and the Idiomelon “Today, the whole universe,” with the Canon of the Feast and that of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint and that of the Feast; after the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint and the Minologion. The Katavasie of Pascha; then “More honorable” with the Katavasia “The Angel cried.” The Exapostilarion of the Saint and that of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Prosomia of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast, Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Saint.

12.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha; after the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Feast, the Apolytikion of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “With his searching right hand.” The Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “In eternal memorial,” “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name” and Dismissal ².

SITUATION FIVE

13.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Saturday of Leave-taking of

2. The Service of the Saint is chanted in this manner on the the rest of the days of this week, except that on those days we chant the 1st Stasis of the Psalter; at “Lord, I have cried” we chant only the 6 Stichira of the Saint and the Prokimenon of the appropriate day.

*(Printed Page 513)*

=== LEAF p529 ===
[Original Greek Text: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation V Concl. (§§ 13–15) & Situation VI Opening (§§ 16–17) (p. 514)]

514

Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, {Σημ. ὅτι τὸ Πεντηκοστάριον ἔχει μόνον 3 Στιχηρὰ διὰ τὸν ἑσπερινὸν τῆς Παρασκευῆς} Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

14.    Τῇ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν ἐκ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τοῦ Ἁγίου κτλ. ὡς ἐν περιπτώσει Δ΄ § 11, αἱ Καταβασίαι τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς ὡς καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου, ἡ Καταβασία Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ α΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Προσόμοια τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄, καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Ἁγίου. Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Μεθ᾿ ἡμέρας ὀκτώ, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς.

15.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ Εἰσοδικόν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῇ φιλοπράγμονι δεξιᾷ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Σὲ τὴν φαεινὴν λαμπάδα, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς Χριστὸς Ἀνέστη, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, Ἀπόλυσις καὶ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς.

ΣΤ΄.

16.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Μυροφόρων, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῶν Μυροφόρων β΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τῶν Μυροφόρων, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ἁγίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Στιχηρόν, καὶ τὸ Πάσχα ἱερόν, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Σὲ τὸν ἀναβαλλόμενον τὸ φῶς, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια Ὅτε κατῆλθες πρὸς τὸν θάνατον, Ὁ εὐσχήμων Ἰωσήφ, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς Μυροφόροις γυναιξί καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

17.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς Κανών, ἡ Λιτὴ τῶν Μυροφόρων καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ἠτήσατο Ἰωσὴφ καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν

*(Printed Page 514)*

=== LEAF p530 ===
[English Facing Translation: Month of April: St. George the Trophy-Bearer (April 23); Situation Five Concl. (§§ 13–15) & Situation Six Opening (§§ 16–17) (p. 515)]

515

the Feast, on Friday evening, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the four Idiomela of the Feast and four of the Saint. {Note: the Pentikostarion only has 3 Stichira for Friday Vespers.} Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the three Idiomela of the Feast, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Saint, and again that of the Feast, and the Dismissal.

14.    On Saturday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Feast, and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter of the day, and the Polyeleos of the Saint etc., as in Situation Four, Paragraph 11. The Katavasie of Pascha; the 9th Ode of the Feast as well as that of the Saint, the Katavasia “The Angel cried.” The first Exapostilarion of the Feast, that of the Saint, and the other of the Feast. At the Praises: 3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “Eight days after Your arising,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion of the Feast.

15.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Pascha; after the Entrance, the Apolytikia of the Feast, of the Saint, of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “With his searching right hand.” The Apostolos and Gospel of the Saint. At “Especially,” “You, the shining lamp,” Communion Hymn of the Feast, “Christ is risen,” “Blessed be the name,” and Dismissal and the Leave-taking of the Feast.

SITUATION SIX

16.    If the Feast of the Saint occurs on the Sunday of the Myrrhbearers, on Saturday evening, after the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the four Stichira of the Resurrection, two of the Myrrhbearers and 4 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Myrrhbearers. “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Saint. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichiron, then the Stichira of Pascha “A sacred Pascha,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “You Who puts on light as a garment.” The Apolytikia: “When You did descend unto death,” “The noble Joseph,” Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “Unto the myrrhbearing women” and the Dismissal.

17.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Liti of the Myrrhbearers, and of the Saint; Glory of the Saint, Now and ever, “Joseph asked for the Body” and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion,

*(Printed Page 515)*
