=== LEAF p341 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situation 3 Concluded (§ 22 concl. – § 26); Sunday after Epiphany (§ 27 incipit) (p. 326)]

326

ἀναγινώσκονται χῦμα τὰ Καθίσματα, ὁ Προεόρτιος Κανὼν καὶ ὁ τῶν
Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἶτα ψάλλονται αἱ Καταβασίαι Βυθοῦ
ἀνεκάληψε πυθμένα, καὶ ἀκολούθως στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν
καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἐξαποστειλάριον δίς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄
τῆς ἡμέρας Προσόμοια Τί ἀμφιγνοεῖς Βαπτιστὰ οἰκονομίαν;
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἰωάννη Βαπτιστα (ζήτει εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῶν
Αἴνων), Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπεστρέφετό
ποτε.
23.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια
ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ προεορτίου Κανόνος. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον,
Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἐν Ἁγίοις θαυμαστός, τὸ Προεόρτιον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις
σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Σαββάτου πρὸ τῶν Φώτων.
Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὸ
Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς. Μετὰ τὸ Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, ψάλλονται τὰ
Ἰδιόμελα τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ Φωνὴ Κυρίου ἐπὶ τῶν ὑδάτων κτλ. καὶ
τελεῖται ὁ Ἁγιασμὸς κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν. Ἐν τῇ
τραπέζῃ κατάλυσις οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου.
24.    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, ψάλλεται ὁ Μ. τῆς ἑορτῆς
Ἑσπερινός, ἐν ᾧ οὐδὲν τῶν Ἀναστασίμων ψάλλομεν, ἀλλ’ ἅπαντα τῆς
ἑορτῆς ὡς ἑξῆς· Μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα,
ψάλλομεν τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Τὸν φωτισμὸν ἡμῶν εἰς ς΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὑπέκλινας κάραν τῷ Προδρόμῳ. Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς
ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα μετὰ τῶν Τροπαρίων καὶ τῶν Στίχων
αὐτῶν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος, τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον καὶ τὰ λοιπά, ὡς διετάχθησαν
ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ
ποταμῷ ἰδών σε ὁ Ἰωάννης καὶ τὰ ἕτερα δύο, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸν ἐκ
Παρθένου ἥλιον, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἐν
Ἰορδάνῃ ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
25.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ ψάλλεται ἡ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου,
ὁ Μ. Ἁγιασμός, ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, ὡς διετάχθησαν
ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-4.
26.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ πρωῒ ψάλλεται ἡ
ἀκολουθία τοῦ τιμίου Προδρόμου, ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 5,
6, 7. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Προδρόμου, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς
μνημόσυνον.

                      Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα.

27.    Ἡ Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα κατὰ τὴν Γ΄ ταύτην περίπτωσιν

*(Printed Page 326)*

=== LEAF p342 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situation 3 Concluded (§ 22 concl. – § 26); Sunday after Epiphany (§ 27 incipit) (p. 327)]

327

of the day. Then the Katavasie "He discovered the bottom of the depth of
the sea," then we chant "More honorable." The Exapostilarion of the Pre-
feast twice. At the Praises: the four Prosomia of the day "Why do you
hesitate, O Baptist?" Glory, Now and ever, "John the Baptist" (seek in the
Aposticha of the Praises), Great Doxology and the Apolytikion "The River
Jordan turned back."
23.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and the Beatitudes, hymns from the 3rd
and 6th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance, "Come let us
worship... who are wonderful in Your Saints." The Apolytikion of the Pre-
feast, the Apolytikion of the Saint of the Church and the Kontakion "Today
has the Lord appeared on the waters of Jordan," Apostolos and Gospel of
the Saturday before Epiphany. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion
Hymn of the day, and "We have seen the [true] light." After "Blessed be
the name of the Lord," the Idiomela of the Blessing of the Waters "The
voice of the Lord upon the waters," etc., are sung, and the Service of the
Blessing of the Waters is performed according to the order of the Mineon.
At table, the consumption of wine and oil is permitted.
24.    On that Saturday evening, the Great Vespers of the Feast is sung, at
which we sing none of the Resurrection Hymns, but all of the Feast as
follows: After the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing the
4 Idiomela "Our illumination" repeating the first two. Glory, Now and
ever, "You did bow your head to the Forerunner." Entrance with the
Gospel, "O Gladsome Light," and the Readings with their Hymns and
Verses, the Apostolos, the Gospel and the rest, as prescribed in Situation
One, Paragraph 2. At the Aposticha: the Idiomela "O Christ God, when
John saw you" and the other two. Glory, Now and ever, "The Sun born of
a virgin," then "Now let your servant depart" and the Trisagion; then the
Apolytikion "When You, Lord, were baptized in Jordan" three times, and
Dismissal.
25.    On that Sunday are sung the Service of the Matins of the Feast, the
Great Blessing of the Waters, and the Liturgy of Saint Basil, as they are
prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3 -4.
26.    On that Sunday evening and Monday morning, the Service of the
Honored Forerunner is sung, as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 5,
6, 7. Apostolos and Gospel of the Forerunner, Communion Hymn "The
righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance."

                      Sunday after Epiphany.

27.    The Sunday after Epiphany according to this Third Situation,

*(Printed Page 327)*

=== LEAF p343 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday after Epiphany (§ 27 concl.), Apodosis (§ 28); Situation 4 (§ 29–33 incipit) (p. 328)]

328

συμπίπτει τῇ ΙΓ΄ τοῦ μηνός, ψάλλεται δὲ ἡ Ἀκολουθία ὡς διετάχθη
ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 8, 9, 10.

                          Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

28.    Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις συμπίπτει τῇ ἐπιούσῃ ἡμέρᾳ Δευτέρᾳ (ΙΔ΄ τοῦ
μηνός), ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὡς προδιετάχθη ἐν
περιπτώσει Α΄ § 11. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τῆς
ἡμέρας, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐπεφάνη ἡ χάρις, Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.

                              Δ΄.

29.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Δευτέρᾳ, τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωῒ (Γ΄ τοῦ
μηνός), μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Ὄρθρου ἐνδιάτακτον Ἀκολουθίαν, ψάλλονται αἱ
Μ. Ὧραι μόναι καὶ λέγεται Τροπάριον Ἑτοιμάζου Ζαβουλὼν καὶ
Κοντάκιον Ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις σήμερον· μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς Θ΄ Ὥρας
Ἀπόλυσις.
30.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, ψάλλεται ὁ Προεόρτιος Ἑσπερινὸς
κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν· μετὰ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις, ὁ Προεόρτιος
τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ Κανών, ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἑτοιμάζου Ζαβουλὼν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
31.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν κτλ. εἰς
τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἑτοιμάζου Ζαβουλὼν δίς, Κανόνες
ὁ Προεόρτιος Ὡς ἐν ἠπείρῳ πεζεύσας καὶ ὁ τῶν Ο΄ Ἀποστόλων
Χριστῷ μαθητεύσαντες (ζήτει τῇ Δ΄ τοῦ μηνός), ἀφ’ ς΄, Κοντάκιον καὶ
Οἶκος, τὰ Προεόρτια καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· εἶτα
ὁ Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
Ἐξαποστειλάριον τῶν Ο΄ Καταλιπόντες κόσμον καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Ὁ
ἐκ Πατρὸς ἀχρόνως, οἱ Αἶνοι τὸ Σοὶ Δόξα, πρέπει καὶ τὰ Ἀπόστιχα.
Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Σαββάτου πρὸ
τῶν Φώτων, Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.
32.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, καὶ τῇ Κυριακῇ πρωῒ ψάλλεται ἡ
Ἀκολουθία τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῶν Φώτων μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου καὶ τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ, ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Β §
4, 5, 6. Ἐν τῇ τραπέζῃ κατάλυσις οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου.
33.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται ὁ Μέγας Ἑσπερινὸς μετὰ
τῶν Ἀναγνωσμάτων τῶν Τροπαρίων καὶ τῶν Στίχων αὐτῶν, τοῦ

*(Printed Page 328)*

=== LEAF p344 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday after Epiphany (§ 27 concl.), Leave-taking (§ 28); Situation 4 (§ 29–33 incipit) (p. 329)]

329

occurs on the 13th of the month; the Service is sung as prescribed in Situation
One, Paragraphs 8, 9, 10.

                          The Leave-taking.

28.    The Leave-taking occurs on the following day, Monday (the 14th of
the month); on that day all the office for the Feast is sung, as prescribed in
Situation One, Paragraph 11. Apostolos and Gospel of the day, Communion
Hymn "The grace of God became manifest today," the Apolytikion "When
You, O Lord, were baptized in the Jordan," and Dismissal.

                           SITUATION FOUR

29.    If the Feast of Epiphany occurs on a Monday, on Friday morning
(the 3rd of the month) after the prescribed Service of Matins, only the Great
Hours are sung and we say the Troparion "Make ready, O Zabulon" and the
Kontakion "Today has the Lord appeared on the waters of Jordan"; the
Dismissal after the Prayer of the 9th Hour.
30.    On Friday evening, the Vespers of the Pre-feast is sung according
to the order of the Mineon; after "Lord, now let your servant depart," the
Pre-festal Canon of the Vespers is sung, and after the Irmos of the 9th Ode
the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Make ready, O Zabulon," and Dismissal.
31.    Saturday at Matins, after the Midnight Service, etc., at "God is the
Lord": the Apolytikion "Make ready O Zabulon" twice, the Canon of the
Pre-feast "Having travelled on foot on land" and the Canon of the 70
Apostles "Having been taught by Christ" (see the 4th of the month); after
the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Forefeast and the Minologion of
the Saints of the day; then the Irmos of the 9th Ode; then we chant "More
honorable." The Exapostilarion "Ageless from the Father," the Praises,
the lesser Doxology "To You belongs glory," and the Aposticha. In the
Liturgy, Apostolos and Gospel of the Saturday before Epiphany, Commun-
ion Hymn "O Lord, blessed are those You chose," "We have seen the [true]
light," and Dismissal.
32.    On Saturday evening and Sunday morning, the Service of the
Sunday before Epiphany is sung together with the Liturgy of Chrysostom
and the Blessing of the Waters, as prescribed in Situation Two, Paragraphs
4, 5, 6. At table, wine and oil are permitted.
33.    On that Sunday evening is sung the Service of the Great Vespers
with the Readings and the Hymns with their Verses, the Apostolos, the

*(Printed Page 329)*

=== LEAF p345 ===
[Original Greek Text: Situation 4 Concluded (§ 33 concl. – § 36); Situation 5 (§ 37); January 11 Heading (p. 330)]

330

Ἀποστόλου, τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, τῶν Ἀποστίχων καὶ λοιπῶν, ὡς
διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 24.

34.    Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τοῦ
Μ. Ἁγιασμοῦ καὶ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου, ὡς εἴρηται ἐν
περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3, 4.
35.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Δευτέρᾳ ἑσπέρας καὶ τῇ Τρίτῃ πρωῒ ψάλλεται ἡ
Ἀκολουθία τοῦ τιμίου Προδρόμου, ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄
§ 5, 6, 7.

                    Ἡ Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα.

36.    Ἡ Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα συμπίπτει κατὰ τὴν Δ΄ ταύτην
περίπτωσιν τῇ ΙΒ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία ἐν τῷ
Ἑσπερινῷ καὶ τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 8, 9,
10.
       Ἡ δὲ Ἀπόδοσις κατὰ τὴν περίστασιν ταύτην συμπίπτει τῇ
Τρίτῃ τῆς προσεχοῦς ἑβδομάδος, καθ’ ἣν ψάλλονται, ὡς προερρήθη ἐν
§ 11, ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας.

                              Ε΄.

37.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Τρίτῃ, Τετάρτῃ, ἢ Πέμπτῃ, τὴν διάταξιν
τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τῶν Μ. Ὡρῶν, ἐν τῇ Παραμονῇ, τοῦ Μ. Ἑσπερινοῦ,
τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου καὶ τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ, ὅρα ἐν
περιπτώσει Α΄ § 1, 2. Τῆς δὲ κυρίας ἡμέρας τὴν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας
τοῦ Ὄρθρου, τοῦ Μ. Ἁγιασμοῦ καὶ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου
διάταξιν ὅρα ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3, 4.
       Τὴν διάταξιν τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τοῦ τιμίου Προδρόμου τῇ
ἐπιούσῃ ἡμέρᾳ, ὅρα ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ Α΄ περιπτώσει § 5, 6, 7. Ἡ δὲ Κυριακὴ
μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα, κατὰ τὴν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Τρίτῃ σύμπτωσιν τῆς ἑορτῆς,
συμπίπτει τῇ ΙΑ΄ τοῦ μηνός, καθ’ ἣν ἑορτάζεται καὶ ἡ μνήμη τοῦ
Ὁσίου Θεοδοσίου τοῦ Κοινοβιάρχου. Τούτου ἡ Ἀκολουθία συμψάλλεται
τῇ τῆς Κυριακῆς κατὰ τὴν ἐν § 39 διάταξιν.

Τῇ ΙΑ΄.     Τοῦ ὁσίου Πατρὸς ἡμῶν Θεοδοσίου τοῦ
Κοινοβιάρχου.

*(Printed Page 330)*

=== LEAF p346 ===
[English Facing Translation: Situation 4 Concluded (§ 33 concl. – § 36); Situation 5 (§ 37); January 11 (§ 38 incipit) (p. 331)]

331

Gospel, the Aposticha, and the rest as prescribed in Situation Three,
Paragraph 24.
34.    On that Monday morning, the Service of the Feast with the Great
Blessing of the Waters and the Liturgy of Saint Basil are performed, as
prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3, 4.
35.    On that Monday evening and Tuesday morning, the Service of the
Honored Forerunner is sung, as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 5,
6, 7.

                      The Sunday after Epiphany.

36.    The Sunday after Epiphany in this Fourth Situation occurs on the
12th of the month, and the Service of Vespers and Matins is sung as
prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 8, 9, 10.
       The Leave-taking in this Situation occurs on the Tuesday of the
following week, on which day all the office for the Feast [is performed], as
prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 11. Apostolos and Gospel of the day.

                           SITUATION FIVE

37.    If the Feast occurs on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, for the
order of the Service of the Great Hours, of the Eve, of the Great Vespers, of
the Liturgy of Basil the Great and the Blessing of the Waters, see Situation
One, Paragraphs 1, 2. On the day of the Feast, the services of Matins, Great
Blessing of the Waters and the Liturgy of Chrysostom [are performed]
according to the order prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3, 4.
       For the order of the Service of the Honored Forerunner on the
following day, see Situation One, Paragraphs 5, 6, 7. The Sunday after
Epiphany, if the Feast occurs on a Tuesday, falls on the 11th of the month,
on which day is celebrated also the Feast of the Righteous Theodosios, the
Founder of Monasteries. His Service is sung jointly with the Sunday
service, according to the order of Paragraph 39.

The 11th.    Our Righteous Father Theodosios, the Founder of
Monasteries.

38.    If the Feast of the Righteous Saint occurs on any day except Sunday,

*(Printed Page 331)*

=== LEAF p347 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 11: St. Theodosios the Cenobiarch (§ 38–41) (p. 332)]

332

38.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Ὁσίου ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς,
ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν
διάταξιν τοῦ Μηναίου· ἂν δὲ συμπέσῃ ἐν Σαββάτῳ, Ἀπόστολος
λέγεται τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον Σαββάτου μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα.
39.    Εἰ τύχοι τῇ Κυριακῇ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας
μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, μεθέορτα γ΄ Εἶδες πῶς
περίκειμαι καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου γ΄, Δόξα μεθέορτον, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄
Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ
τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ὁσίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ὁσίου, Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον· τὸ ἀναστάσιμον
Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ὁσίου, τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

40.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἐν
Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς
εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων· εἰς δὲ τὴν γ΄
Στιχολογίαν τὸ τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ μεθέορτον· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ
Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ
Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ὁσίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα
τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ μεθέορτον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα
καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· αἱ Καταβασίαι Στείβει
θαλάσσης καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον
τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ μεθέορτον Βαβαὶ τῶν θείων ἔργων σου. Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄ (ὅπου δ’ ἐπισημότερον
ἑορτάζεται ὁ Ὅσιος, λέγονται ἀντὶ τῶν μεθεόρτων οἱ Αἶνοι τοῦ Ἁγίου
εἰς δ΄). Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία
Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

41.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς· μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ
τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, Κοντάκιον Ἐπεφάνης σήμερον, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ
Ὁσίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ
φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 332)*

=== LEAF p348 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 11: St. Theodosios the Cenobiarch (§ 38–41) (p. 333)]

333

his Service is sung together with that of the Post-feast according to the order
of the Mineon; if the Feast occurs on a Saturday, the Apostolos of the Saint
and the Gospel of the Saturday after Epiphany are read.
39.    If the Feast occurs on the Sunday after Epiphany, in Vespers on
Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at
"Lord, I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Post-
feast "Did you see how" and 3 of the Righteous Saint, Glory of the Post-
feast, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O
Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Righteous Saint.
At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Righteous Saint,
Now and ever of the Post-feast. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the
Righteous Saint, of the Feast, and Dismissal.
40.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the "When You, O Lord, were
baptized in Jordan" and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the
Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrec-
tion Kathismata and those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia; in the 3rd
Stasis [Stichologia] the Kathismata of the Righteous Saint and of the Post-
feast; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the
Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Feast and of the
Righteous Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Righteous Saint and
of the Post-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrec-
tion, and the Minologion of the Saints. The Katavasie "Israel passed
through," and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing "More
honorable." The Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Righteous Saint
and of the Post-feast "Look at your divine works." At the Praises: 4
Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Post-feast (wherever the Righteous Saint
is more formally celebrated, instead of those of the Post-feast we do the 4
Praises of the Righteous Saint). Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, "Most
blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
41.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns
from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast. After the Entrance, the
Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Feast, of the Righteous Saint and of
the Saint of the Church, Kontakion "You have appeared today." Apostolos
of the Righteous Saint and Gospel of the Sunday after Epiphany. At
"Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We
have seen the [true] light," and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 333)*

=== LEAF p349 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday after Epiphany with the Triodion (§ 42–44 incipit) (p. 334)]

334

                 Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα μετὰ Τριῳδίου.

Σημ. Δεῖ γινώσκειν ὅτι τὸ Ἅγιον Πάσχα κατέρχεται μέχρι τῆς ΚΒ΄
τοῦ Μαρτίου μηνός, καὶ ἀνέρχεται μέχρι τῆς ΚΔ΄ τοῦ Ἀπριλίου,
ἑπομένως καὶ τὸ Τριῴδιον ἄρχεται κατὰ μὲν τὴν πρώτην περίστασιν,
τῇ ΙΑ΄ Ἰανουαρίου, κατὰ δὲ τὴν δευτέραν, τῇ ΙΓ΄ Φεβρουαρίου. Περὶ
τούτου ὅρα τὸν Ἑορτοδρόμιον Πίνακα.
42.    Εἰ τύχοι ἄρχεσθαι τὸ Τριῴδιον τῇ ΙΑ΄ Ἰανουαρίου καὶ
συμπέσοι καὶ ἡ Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὰ Φῶτα, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς
ἐφεξῆς. Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ
Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄,
τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ὁσίου Θεοδοσίου γ΄. Δόξα, Παντοκράτορ
Κύριε, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν,
τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τοῦ Ὁσίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Ὁσίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ τοῦ Τριῳ-
δίου· τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Ὁσίου, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς,
καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
43.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἐν
Ἰορδάνῃ, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς
ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ· εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα
Καθίσματα μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ
Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ
Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς καὶ
ὁ τοῦ Ὁσίου· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς Ὀκτωήχου, εἶτα
Κάθισμα τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος
τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὸ
Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου· αἱ Καταβασίαι Στείβει θαλάσσης, εἶτα τὸ
Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ,
καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, Δόξα, Τῆς μετανοίας ἄνοιξόν μοι καὶ τὰ
λοιπὰ δύο Τροπάρια, τὸ Σῶσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν λαόν σου καὶ ἀκολούθως
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον,
τὸ τοῦ Ὁσίου καὶ τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα
δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄ (ἐκτὸς ἂν ἐπισήμως ἑορτάζηται ὁ Ἅγιος, ὅτε καὶ
λέγονται ἀντὶ τῶν μεθεόρτων Αἶνοι ἐκ τοῦ Ἁγίου). Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳ-
δίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον
σωτηρία.

44.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου

*(Printed Page 334)*

=== LEAF p350 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday after Epiphany with the Triodion (§ 42–44 incipit) (p. 335)]

335

                 Sunday after Epiphany with the Triodion.

Note: It is necessary to know that the Holy Easter can occur as early as on
March 22 and as late as on April 24; consequently, the Triodion period may
begin in the earliest possible instance on January 11, and in the latest
possible instance on February 13. Concerning this, see the Chart of
Celebrations.
42.    If the Triodion period begins on January 11 and this occurs on the
Sunday after Epiphany, the Service is sung as follows: In Vespers on
Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter at "Lord,
I have cried" we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion and
3 of the Righteous Theodosios, Glory, "Almighty Lord," Now and ever the
first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon
and the Readings of the Righteous Saint. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection
Stichira, Glory of the Righteous Saint, Now and ever of the Triodion. The
Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Righteous Saint, of the Feast and
Dismissal.
43.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the "When You, O Lord, were
baptized in Jordan" and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the
Apolytikia as in Vespers; then the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrec-
tion Kathismata and those of the Feast in place of the Theotokia; the
Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi and the Prokimenon.
The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Triodion with the Verse "Glory
to You, O God" and that of the Righteous Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Eight Modes [Oktoichos], then the Kathisma of
the Righteous Saint and of the Triodion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and
Ikos of the Triodion, and the Minologion of the Saints of the day, and the
Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "Israel passed through," then
"Let every breath" and the Gospel of Matins, "Having beheld the Resur-
rection," Psalm 50, Glory, "Open to me the doors of repentance" and the
other two Hymns. Then "Save, O Lord, Your people" and following this
we sing "More honorable." The Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the
Righteous Saint and of the Triodion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira
and 4 of the Post-feast (wherever the Righteous Saint is more formally
celebrated, instead of those of the Post-feast hymns, we do the 4 Praises of
the Righteous Saint). Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Most blessed,"
Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
44.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns

*(Printed Page 335)*
