=== LEAF p491 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XV Concl. and Situation XVI (§§ 49–50) (p. 476)]

476

    Τῷ αὐτῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινός, καὶ τὸ πρωὶ
τῇ Κυριακῇ ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου, ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Η΄ § 27,
28, 29. Ἡ δὲ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Ὁσίας ψάλλεται ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Ἑσπερινός,
ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ §18.

ΙΣΤ΄.

49.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῶν Βαΐων, (ἤτοι τῇ
Παρασκευῇ πρὶν τοῦ Σαββάτου τοῦ Λαζάρου) τῇ Τετάρτῃ πρωῒ ἐν τῷ
Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Πλούσιος ἐν πάθεσι δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν,
τὰ γ΄ τῆς σειρᾶς Προσόμοια καὶ δ΄ Προεόρτια. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα
τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν
Προηγιασμένων.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας τὸ Μέγα Ἀπόδειπνον, τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωῒ ὁ Ὄρθρος
τῆς Παραμονῆς καὶ αἱ Ὧραι ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει
Α΄ § 2. Μετὰ τὴν εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας ὁ Μέγας Ἑσπερινός, καὶ τὸ πρωὶ τῆς
Παρασκευῆς ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου, ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

50.    Τῇ αὐτῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς
τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια Βουλὴν
προαιώνιον εἰς δ΄, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τὴν ψυχωφελῆ πληρώσαντες
δίς, καὶ δ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τοῦ Λαζάρου, Δόξα, Τὴν ψυχωφελῆ
πληρώσαντες (τὸ μέγα), Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ Οὐρανοῦ,
Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια τοῦ μικροῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ Ἄρχων τῶν
ἄνω δυνάμεων, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Τῷ ἕκτῳ μηνί, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
Σήμερον τῆς Σωτηρίας ἐκ τρίτου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ
Λαζάρου ψάλλεται ἐν τοῖς Ἀποδείπνοις, τὸ δὲ πρωῒ ὁ Ὄρθρος καὶ
ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Λαζάρου ψάλλονται κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ
διάταξιν.

*(Printed Page 476)*

=== LEAF p492 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Fifteen Concl. and Situation Sixteen (§§ 49–50) (p. 477)]

477

    On this Saturday evening, the Great Vespers, and on Sunday
morning the Matins of the Feast with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are sung
as prescribed in Situation Eight, Paragraphs 27, 28 and 29. The Service of
Saint Mary is chanted at Compline.
    That evening, the Leave-taking of the Feast is celebrated, and
Vespers is sung as prescribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 18.

SITUATION SIXTEEN

49.    If the Feast occurs on Friday of the Week of Palms {i.e., the Friday
before Lazarus Saturday}, on Wednesday morning at Vespers, after the
Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord," at "Lord, I have cried" the
Idiomelon "Rich in passions" (twice) and the Hymn to the Martyrs, the
three Prosomia of the sequence and 4 of the Pre-feast. Glory, Now and ever,
"Gabriel announces." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and the Readings
of the day. Then "Let my prayer arise," and the Liturgy of the Pre-
sanctified.
    In the evening the Great Compline, on Thursday morning the
Matins of the Eve and the Hours are celebrated as prescribed in Situation
One, Paragraph 2. After the Prayer of the 6th Hour, Dismissal.
    On Thursday evening, the Great Vespers, on Friday morning the
Matins of the Feast with the Liturgy of Chrysostom are celebrated as
prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3, 4, and 5.

The Leave-taking

50.    That Friday evening, after the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have
cried" we chant the 3 Prosomia of the Feast "Revealing the pre-eternal
counsel" in four (the first one twice), the Idiomelon "Having completed the
soul-saving forty-day fast," (twice) and the four Idiomela of Lazarus.
Glory, "Having completed the soul-saving forty-day fast" (the longer,
more slowly sung hymn), Now and ever, "Sent from Heaven." Entrance,
"O Gladsome Light," and the Prokimenon of the day. At the Aposticha: the
3 Prosomia of Small Vespers "Leader of the heavenly powers," Glory, Now
and ever, "In the sixth month." The Apolytikion "Today marks the
crowning of our salvation" (3 times), and Dismissal. The Canon of Lazarus
is sung at Compline; in the morning, the Matins and Liturgy of Lazarus are
celebrated according to the order of the Triodion.

*(Printed Page 477)*

=== LEAF p493 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XVII Opening (§§ 51–53) (p. 478)]

478

ΙΖ΄.

51.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, τῇ Πέμπτῃ πρωῒ
ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τοῦ Τριῳδίου τῆς σειρᾶς
Προσόμοια, καὶ γ΄ Προεόρτια Κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς
ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν
ἅπαξ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου Σταυροθεοτοκίον, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε κτλ. καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Λαζάρου, μετὰ μικροῦ
Ἀποδείπνου· μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν τῆς Θ΄ τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Κοντάκιον
Ἐπελεύσει Πνεύματος, Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄ Ὁ ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ, τὸ
Ἄσπιλε ἀμόλυντε κτλ. καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ πρωΐ, ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς Παραμονῆς καὶ αἱ Ὧραι
ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2. Μετὰ τὴν Εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας
Ἀπόλυσις.
52.    Τὸ ἑσπέρας, ἐν τῷ Μεγάλῳ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν,
εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄ καὶ τοῦ
Λαζάρου Ἰδιόμελα δ΄. Δόξα, Τὴν ψυχωφελῆ πληρώσαντες (τὸ μέγα),
Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ Οὐρανοῦ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον
τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα,
τὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον χαρᾶς Εὐαγγέλια,
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, Τὴν κοινὴν Ἀνάστασιν ἅπαξ, καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.

    Σημ. Τῷ Σαββάτῳ τοῦ Λαζάρου, καὶ τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων,
προτάσσεται ἡ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ Ἀκολουθία διά τε τὸν λόγον τῆς
προτεραιότητος κατὰ χρόνον, καὶ διὰ τὸ ὅτι ἐστὶν ἡ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ
ἑορτὴ τὸ κεφάλαιον τῆς σωτηρίας ἡμῶν καὶ πρώτη ἀρχὴ πασῶν τῶν
Δεσποτικῶν ἑορτῶν.

53.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς
ἑορτῆς, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν
Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τῆς ἑορτῆς. Καθίσματα
εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν τοῦ Λαζάρου, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἰς
τὴν β΄ αὖθις τοῦ Λαζάρου ἕν, καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἕτερον, εἰς τὴν γ΄
Στιχολογίαν τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς· οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον

*(Printed Page 478)*

=== LEAF p494 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Seventeen Opening (§§ 51–53) (p. 479)]

479

SITUATION SEVENTEEN

51.    If the Feast occurs on the Saturday of Lazarus, on Thursday
morning at Vespers, at "Lord, I have cried," we chant the 3 Prosomia of the
Triodion, and 3 of the Pre-feast "Hidden mystery," Glory, Now and ever,
"Gabriel announces." "O Gladsome Light," and the Readings of the day.
At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon (twice) and the Hymn to the Martyrs
(once), Glory, Now and ever, the Stavrotheotokion of the Triodion, the
Trisagion, the "Theotokos Virgin" etc. and Dismissal.
    In the evening the Canon of Lazarus is sung with the Small
Compline; after the 9th Irmos the Trisagion, the Kontakion "Through the
descent of the Holy Spirit," "Lord, have mercy' (40 times) "You who in all
times," "O Lady, Bride of God" etc. and Dismissal.
    On Friday morning, the Matins of the Eve and the Hours are
celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraph 2. After the Prayer of
the 6th hour, the Dismissal.
52.    In the evening, at Great Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm, at
"Lord, I have cried" we chant the 3 Prosomia of the Feast in 4, (i.e. the 1st
one twice) and the 4 Idiomela of Lazarus. Glory, "Having completed the
soul-saving forty-day fast" (the longer, more slowly sung hymn), Now and
ever, "Sent from heaven." Entrance, "O Gladsome light," the Prokimenon
of the day, and the Readings of the Feast. At the Aposticha: the Idiomela
of the Feast, Glory, Now and ever, "Today is the proclamation of joy." The
Apolytikion of the Feast (twice), the Apolytikion "Giving us before Your
Passion" (once), and Dismissal.
    Note: On both the Saturday of Lazarus and Palm Sunday, the
Service of the Annunciation precedes, for the reason of its historical priority
in time, and because the Feast of the Annunciation is the crown of our
salvation and the first source and beginning of all the Lord's Feasts.

53.    On Saturday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Feast; then
the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is
the Lord": the Apolytikia as at Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos of the
Feast. Kathismata in the 1st Stasis [Stichologia] of Lazarus, Glory, Now
and ever of the Feast; in the Second Stasis, one of Lazarus and one of the
Feast; in the Third Stasis, the two of the Feast; the Anavathmi, the 1st
Antiphon of the Mode IV, the Prokimenon of the Feast. Then "Let

*(Printed Page 479)*

=== LEAF p495 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XVII Concl. (§§ 53–54) and Situation XVIII Opening (§ 55) (p. 480)]

480

τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἑορτῆς, Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ τὸ
Εὐαγγέλιον τὸ τῆς Λειτουργίας τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν
Χριστοῦ, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν,
τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον
Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς ς΄, καὶ ὁ τοῦ
Λαζάρου εἰς δ΄ μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι·
ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, εἶτα Κάθισμα τοῦ
Λαζάρου Συμπαρέστησαν Χριστῷ, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπεστάλη
Γαβριήλ· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ
Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου· αἱ
Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ εἶτα ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς
καὶ τοῦ Λαζάρου μετὰ τοῦ αὐτοῦ στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός, ἡ
Καταβασία Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ Θεοῦ
Κιβωτῷ, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τῆς ἑορτῆς ἕν, καὶ τοῦ Λαζάρου
δύο. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Λαζάρου
Ἰδιόμελα γ΄. Δόξα, Μέγα καὶ παράδοξον, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸ ἀπ᾿
αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον τῆς
σωτηρίας.
54.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς· εἰς τὸ β΄
Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθείς, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Εὐαγγελίζεσθε
ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας . . . Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Λαζάρου Τὴν κοινὴν Ἀνάστασιν, καὶ
Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ· ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστόν,
Ἀπόστολος τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Λαζάρου. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ χαρὰν μεγάλην, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐξελέξατο
Κύριος, Τὴν κοινὴν ἀνάστασιν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

    Τὸ ἑσπέρας, ἐν τῇ Θ΄ Ὥρᾳ λέγομεν Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ
Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ οὕτως ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν τῇ
περιπτώσει ταύτῃ, κατὰ τὴν γνώμην τῶν ἀοιδίμων Πατριαρχῶν
Κωνσταντίνου τοῦ ἀπὸ Σιναίου, καὶ Γρηγορίου τοῦ ς΄.

ΙΗ΄.

55.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων, τῇ Παρασκευῇ, ἐν
τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Τὴν ψυχωφελῆ πληρώσαντες δίς, καὶ
τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν ἅπαξ, τοῦ Λαζάρου Ἰδιόμελα δ΄ καὶ γ΄ Προεόρτια.
Δόξα, Τὴν ψυχωφελῆ πληρώσαντες (τὸ μέγα), Καὶ νῦν,

*(Printed Page 480)*

=== LEAF p496 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Seventeen Concl. (§§ 53–54) and Situation Eighteen Opening (§ 55) (p. 481)]

481

everything that has breath," and the Gospel of the Liturgy of the Feast
{Luke 1:24-38}. Then "We have seen the Resurrection of Christ," Psalm
50 (read), Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," Now and
ever, repeat the same; the Verse "Have mercy on me, O God" and the
Idiomelon "Today Gabriel announces." The Canon of the Feast in six, and
the Canon of Lazarus in four with the Verse "Glory to You, our God, glory
to You." After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, the
Kathisma of Lazarus "The sisters of Lazarus stood beside Christ," and of
the Feast "Gabriel was sent"; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of
the Feast, the Minologion of the Feast and the Postscript of the Triodion.
The Katavasie "I shall open my mouth," and the 9th Ode of the Feast and
that of Lazarus with the Verse "Glory to You, our God, glory to You." The
Katavasia "O Earth, announce good tidings of great joy . . . As a live ark
of God." Exapostilaria: one of the Feast and two of Lazarus. At the Praises:
3 Prosomia of the Feast and 3 of Lazarus, Glory, "A great and marvelous
wonder," Now and ever, "The mystery hidden before all time," Great
Doxology and "Today is the crowning of our salvation."
54.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast; at the 2nd Antiphon
"who was incarnate for our sake." The Hymn of the Entrance "Proclaim
from day to day . . . Save us . . . who is risen from the dead." The
Apolytikion of the Feast, that of Lazarus "Giving us before Your Passion,"
and the Kontakion "To the Champion General." Instead of the Trisagios
Hymn, we sing "As many as have been baptized into Christ," the Epistle
of the Feast [Hebrews 2:11-18] the Gospel of Lazarus {John 11:1-45}. At
"Especially," "O Earth, announce good tidings of great joy . . . As a live
ark of God," Communion Hymn "The Lord has chosen Zion," the
Apolytikion "Giving us before Your Passion" and Dismissal.
    In the evening at the 9th Hour we say the Apolytikion and Kontakion
of the Feast, and in this manner the Leave-taking of the Feast takes place in
this Situation, according to the opinion of the revered Patriarchs Constantine
the Sinite, and Gregory the 6th, of blessed memory.

SITUATION EIGHTEEN

55.    If the Feast occurs on Palm Sunday, on Friday, at Vespers after the
Introductory Psalm and "To the Lord" at "Lord I have cried," we chant the
Idiomelon "Having completed the forty-day fast" (twice) and the Hymn to
the Martyrs (once), the 4 Idiomela of Lazarus and 3 of the Pre-feast. Glory,
"Having completed the soul-saving forty-day fast" (the great, slow one),

*(Printed Page 481)*

=== LEAF p497 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XVIII Cont. (§§ 55–58) (p. 482)]

482

Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ
Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.

    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ψάλλεται, μετὰ Ἀποδείπνου μικροῦ, ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ
Λαζάρου, ὡς συνήθως· Κοντάκιον μετὰ τὴν Θ΄ Ἡ πάντων χαρά.

56.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς τὸ
Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὴν κοινὴν ἀνάστασιν καὶ
ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, Τὴν κοινὴν ἀνάστασιν δίς, καὶ
τὸ Προεόρτιον ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος. Κάθισμα
Κατοικτίρας τῆς Μάρθας δίς, καὶ εὐθὺς τὰ Εὐλογητάρια· μετὰ τὴν
Ἐκφώνησιν Ὅτι ηὐλόγηται, καὶ τὸ ἕτερον Ἡ πηγὴ τῆς σοφίας δίς,
τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ καὶ ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, οἱ δύο Κανόνες τοῦ Λαζάρου
καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· ἀπὸ
γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἐπελεύσει Πνεύματος, τὸ Κάθισμα Προγινώσκων
τὰ πάντα, καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Σήμερον ἅπασα· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ
Οἶκος τοῦ Λαζάρου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου,
αἱ Καταβασίαι Ὑγρὰν διοδεύσας, καὶ ἀντὶ τοῦ Τὴν τιμιωτέραν,
ψάλλονται καὶ οἱ δύο Κανόνες τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Λαζάρου, ἡ Καταβασία
Κυρίως Θεοτόκον, εἶτα τὸ Ἅγιος Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς ἐκ δευτέρου, καὶ τὸ
Ὑψοῦτε Κύριον τὸν Θεόν, τὰ δύο τοῦ Λαζάρου Ἐξαποστειλάρια καὶ
τὸ Προεόρτιον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἰδιόμελα τοῦ Λαζάρου δ΄ καὶ δ΄
Προεόρτια, Δόξα, Μέγα καὶ παράδοξον θαῦμα, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

57.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοί. Τροπάρια
ἐκ τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Λαζάρου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον,
Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
Τὴν κοινὴν Ἀνάστασιν, τὸ Προεόρτιον Σήμερον τῆς παγκοσμίου, τὸ
Κοντάκιον Ἡ πάντων χαρά· [ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου Ὕμνου] τὸ Ὅσοι εἰς
Χριστόν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Λαζάρου. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως ὁ τῆς θ΄ Εἱρμὸς Τὴν ἁγνὴν ἐνδόξως τιμήσωμεν.
Κοινωνικὸν Ἐκ στόματος νηπίων, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Τὴν κοινὴν
Ἀνάστασιν καὶ ἡ Ἀπόλυσις Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν.

58.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ
τὸ ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄ Προσόμοια

*(Printed Page 482)*

=== LEAF p498 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Eighteen Cont. (§§ 55–58) (p. 483)]

483

Now and ever, "Gabriel proclaims." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," and
the Readings of the day {Genesis 49:33 -50:26, Proverbs 31:9-31}. Then
"Let my prayer arise" and the rest of the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts.
    In the evening, the Canon of Lazarus is chanted with the Small
Compline, as usual; Kontakion after the 9th Hour "Christ, everyone's joy."

56.    Saturday at Matins, after "Blessed is our God," the Trisagion,
Psalm 50, the Apolytikion "Giving us before Your Passion" and the
Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion "Giving us before
Your Passion" (twice) and the Apolytikion of the Pre-feast (once), the
Psalter and the Amomos, the Kathisma "Showing compassion for the tears
of Martha" (twice), and immediately the Evlogitaria; after the Exclama-
tion "For blessed is Your name" and the other Kathisma "The source of
wisdom" (twice). Then we recite "Having beheld the Resurrection" and
Psalm 50 (read). The two Canons of Lazarus and that of the Pre-feast with
the Verse "Glory to You, our God, glory to You." After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion "Through the descent of the Holy Spirit," the Kathisma {of
Lazarus} "Foreknowing all things as Creator" and the Pre-feast "Today
all"; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of Lazarus, the Minologion
and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "Traversing the sea,"
and, instead of "More honorable," we chant the 9th Ode of both Canons of
Lazarus and the Katavasia "Mainly the Theotokos." Then the "Holy is the
Lord our God" (twice) and "Praise the Lord God." The 2 Exapostilaria of
Lazarus and that of the Pre-feast. At the Praises: the 4 Idiomela of Lazarus
and 4 of the Pre-feast, Glory, "A great and marvelous wonder," Now and
ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
57.    At the Liturgy, the Typika [Psalm 102 and 145] and the Beatitudes.
With the Beatitudes we sing four Troparia from Canticle Three of the Canon
of Lazarus and four Troparia from Canticle Six; at the Entrance, "O come
let us worship . . . who is risen from the dead." The Apolytikion "Giving
us before Your Passion," that of the Pre-feast "Today is the prelude of joy,"
the Kontakion "Christ, everyone's joy." {Instead of the Trisagios Hymn}
we chant "As many as have been baptized," Apostolos and Gospel of
Lazarus {Hebrews 12:28 -13:8, John 11:1-45}. At "Especially," the Irmos
of the 9th Ode of the First Canon "O people, in hymns," the Communion
Hymn "Out of the mouths of babes," the Apolytikion "Giving us before
Your Passion" and the Dismissal: "Who is risen from the dead."
58.    Saturday at Great Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and the
Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we chant the 3 Prosomia of the Feast in 4,

*(Printed Page 483)*

=== LEAF p499 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XVIII Concl. (§§ 58–59) (p. 484)]

484

εἰς δ΄ καὶ τῶν Βαΐων Ἰδιόμελα δ΄. Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη
ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον Ὁ Κύριος
ἐβασίλευσεν, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα, τὸ πρῶτον τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὰ
δύο τῶν Βαΐων. εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἰδιόμελα Τῷ
ἕκτῳ μηνὶ κτλ. Δόξα, Σήμερον ἡ χάρις τοῦ Ἁγίου
Πνεύματος, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῶν Βαΐων, αὖθις τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ ἡ Ἀπόλυσις τῶν
Βαΐων.

59.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς τὸ
Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ψάλλεται ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἡ τῶν Βαΐων.
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Σήμερον
τῆς σωτηρίας καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια
ὡς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς
τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν Καθίσματα τῶν Βαΐων β΄, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὁ
μέγας στρατηγός, εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν αὖθις β΄ τῶν Βαΐων, Καὶ
νῦν, Σήμερον ἅπασα· εἰς τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν τὸ α΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς
Γαβριὴλ ἐξ οὐρανοῦ εἶτα τῶν Βαΐων τὸ Ὁ ἐπὶ θρόνου Χερουβίμ, Καὶ
νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη Γαβριήλ, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου,
τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τὸ τῆς
Λειτουργίας τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου,
Καὶ νῦν, τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον
Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς ἕξ, καὶ ὁ τῶν
Βαΐων εἰς δ΄ ἄνευ Στίχων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς ἡ Ὑπακοὴ Μετὰ κλάδων
ὑμνήσαντες πρότερον· ἀφ᾿ ς΄, Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς,
τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῶν Βαΐων, αἱ
Καταβασίαι Ὤφθησαν αἱ πηγαί, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ καὶ τῶν
δύο ἑορτῶν, προηγουμένης τῆς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ, καὶ λέγεται τὸ
Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ Θεοῦ, καὶ ἡ τῶν Βαΐων Θεὸς
Κύριος ἄνευ Στίχου, τὸ αὐτὸ (τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος) καὶ (ψάλλεται ὡς
ἡ) Καταβασία (τῆς θ΄ Ὠδῆς)· εἶτα Ἅγιος Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς δὶς
(τοῦτο μόνον), καὶ τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἐξαποστειλάρια, μετὰ ταῦτα
ἀναγινώσκεται ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἀρχιερέως ἢ Ἱερέως ἡ εὐχὴ τῶν Βαΐων.
Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Προσόμοια τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄ καὶ τῶν Βαΐων Ἰδιόμελα
Ὁ πλεῖστος ὄχλος Κύριε γ΄. Δόξα, Πρὸ ἓξ ἡμερῶν τοῦ
Πάσχα, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη
καὶ τὸ Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας.

*(Printed Page 484)*

=== LEAF p500 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Eighteen Concl. (§§ 58–59) (p. 485)]

485

{repeating the first} and 4 Idiomela of Palm Sunday, Glory, Now and ever,
"Sent from heaven." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon
"The Lord reigns." The Readings: the first of the Feast {Genesis 28:10-
17} and the two of Palm Sunday {since the direction here is not clear, one
may conclude that these should be the 2nd and 3rd Readings of Palm
Sunday, Zephaniah 3:14-19 and Zechariah 9:9-15}. At the Aposticha: the
3 Idiomela of the Feast "In the sixth month," etc., Glory, "Today the grace
of the Holy Spirit," Now and ever, "Today is the announcement of joy."
The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of Palm Sunday, and again that of the
Feast, and the Dismissal of Palm Sunday.
59.    On Sunday at Matins, after "Blessed is our God," the Trisagion,
Psalm 50, the Liti of the Feast and of Palm Sunday, Glory, Now and ever,
"Today Gabriel announces"; the Trisagion, "Today marks the crowning
of our salvation" and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia
as at Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos of the Feast. At the first Stasis
[Stichologia] 2 Kathismata of the Palms, Now and ever of the Feast "The
great general." At the 2nd Stasis [Stichologia] 2 of Palm Sunday Now and
ever, "All creation rejoices today." At the 3rd Stasis, the 1st Kathisma of
the Feast "Gabriel from heaven," then the Kathisma of Palms "He who sits
upon the throne of the cherubim," Now and ever, "Gabriel was sent." The
Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode IV, the Prokimenon of the Feast.
Then "Let everything that has breath," then the Gospel of the Feast from
the Liturgy {Luke 1:24-38}, Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "Through the inter-
cessions of the Theotokos," Now and ever repeat the same, the Verse "O
God have mercy on me" and the Idiomelon "Today Gabriel announces."
The Canon of the Feast (in six) and that of the Palms (in four) without verses.
After the 3rd Ode, the Ypakoi "First they sang in praise of"; after the 6th
Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, the Minologion of the Feast and
the Postscript of the Palms. The Katavasie "The springs of the deep were
seen," then the 9th Ode of both Feasts, with that of the Feast of the
Annunciation "O Earth, announce . . . As a live ark of God" being sung first
and then that of the Palms "The Lord is God" without verses. The same
hymn {The Lord is God} is sung as the Katavasia {the concluding hymn of
the 9th Ode}. Then we chant "Holy is the Lord our God" twice (this quoted
verse only) and the two Exapostilaria of the Feast. After these, the
Archpriest or Priest reads the Prayer of the Palms. At the Praises: 3
Prosomia of the Feast and the 3 Idiomela of the Palms "A very great
multitude," Glory, "Six days before the Passover," Now and ever, "The
mystery before all time," Great Doxology and "Today marks the crowning
of our salvation."

*(Printed Page 485)*
