=== LEAF p1 ===
[Binding Cover: Gilt lettering on crimson embossed cloth binding, framed within classical Greek key and fillet borders, centered with an ornate Byzantine cross with acanthus foliate terminals]

GEORGE VIOLAKIS

TYPIKON

THE RITUAL ORDER
OF THE SERVICES OF
THE GREAT CHURCH OF CHRIST

[Gold embossed Byzantine Cross]

BILINGUAL EDITION

=== LEAF p2 ===
[Frontispiece: High-resolution full-color reproduction of the 9th-century imperial mosaic in the Narthex of Hagia Sophia, Constantinople, depicting the enthroned Christ Pantokrator holding an open Gospel book inscribed in Greek: "† ΕΙΡΗΝΗ ΥΜΙΝ. ΕΓΩ ΕΙΜΙ ΤΟ ΦΩΣ ΤΟΥ ΚΟΣΜΟΥ", with Emperor Leo VI prostrate in adoration (proskynesis) at His right foot, flanked by roundels of the Theotokos and an Archangel]

[Printed Caption below mosaic:]
Christ, the Lord of Holy Wisdom (Agia Sophia) with the kneeling Emperor Leo VI receiving the investiture of Holy Wisdom. End of the ninth century mosaic in the narthex of the Cathedral of Agia Sophia in Constantinople built in the sixth century.

=== LEAF p3 ===
[Half-Title Leaf]

GEORGE VIOLAKIS

TYPIKON

BILINGUAL EDITION

=== LEAF p4 ===
[Greek Title Page: Facing English Title Page]

ΤΥΠΙΚΟΝ
ΤΗΣ ΤΟΥ ΧΡΙΣΤΟΥ
ΜΕΓΑΛΗΣ ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΑΣ

ΟΜΟΙΟΝ ΚΑΘ' ΟΛΑ
Πρὸς τὴν ἐν Κωνσταντινουπόλει ἐγκεκριμένην ἔκδοσιν ἥτις
δὶς ἐξεδόθη ὑπο Κωνσταντίνου πρωτοψάλτου
μὲ πολλὰς προσθήκας καὶ ἐπιδιορθώσεις
ὑπὸ τοῦ πρωτοψάλτου

ΓΕΩΡΓΙΟΥ ΒΙΟΛΑΚΗ

Ἐργασθέντος μετὰ δύο ἀλλεπαλλήλων ἐπιτροπῶν, ἐπὶ τούτῳ
Πατριαρχικῇ διαταγῇ ὁρισθεισῶν.

Μεταφρασθὲν ὑπὸ
Αἰδεσ. Ἐπαμεινώνδα Θ. Ἀθανασάκου,
Πρωτοπρεσβυτέρου

Συνταχθὲν καὶ μετὰ Λεξιλογίου Ὅρων
ὑπὸ Γεωργίου Θ. Δέμου

Συμβάλλων Μεταφραστὴς καὶ Συντάκτης
Θεόδωρος Μπόγδανος

=== LEAF p5 ===
[English Title Page: Facing Greek Title Page]

THE RITUAL ORDER
OF THE SERVICES OF
THE GREAT CHURCH OF CHRIST

IDENTICAL IN EVERY RESPECT
With the edition approved in Constantinople and published twice
by Constantine the First Chanter with many additions and
corrections by the First Chanter

GEORGE VIOLAKIS

Working in collaboration with two successive committees
appointed to this task by Patriarchal order.

Translated by
REV. ROBERT T. ATHAS,
PROTOPRESBYTER

Edited, and with a Dictionary of Terms by
GEORGE T. DEMOS, MD

Contributing Translator and Editor
THEODORE BOGDANOS,
PROFESSOR EMERITUS

=== LEAF p6 ===
[Publication Imprint and Cataloging-in-Publication Page]

Published by:
The Greek Orthodox Metropolis of Denver Church Music Federation
12 Tamerlain Ct.
Highlands Ranch, Colorado 80130-3984
George T. Demos, M.D., Editor

© 2015, for all countries by:
The Greek Orthodox Metropolis of Denver Church Music Federation
All rights reserved. Published 2014
Printed in the United States of America.
No part of this work may be altered in any form, nor reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or by any information storage or retrieval system without permission in writing from the author and publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review to be printed in a magazine, newspaper or on an internet website. For information contact the publisher.

Cover Design by George T. Demos, M.D.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America, Greek Orthodox Metropolis of Denver Church Music Federation

The Ritual Order of the Services of the Great Church of Christ
George Violakis - Bilingual Edition

Library of Congress Control Number: 2014932658
ISBN: 978-0-692-24874-4

=== LEAF p7 ===
[Dedication and Memorial Inscription — Printed Page v]

THIS PUBLICATION WAS MADE POSSIBLE
BY THE GENEROUS GIFT OF

James and Becky Economou
Chris and Vicki Economou
Dr. Anthony Economou

IN LOVING MEMORY OF OUR PARENTS AND
GRANDPARENTS

Christ Economou and Sophia Economou
Reverend Antonios Kalogeropoulos and
Presvytera Katina Kalogeropoulos

Christ Economou was born in Rendina, Greece in 1890. His grandfather, the village priest, placed him at the psaltiri (chanter’s stand) around the age of nine. Left legally blind by a high fever, Christ memorized from hearing what other chanters had learned from books. Arriving in America at age 21, he served the church in every city in which he lived, always without remuneration for himself and without reimbursment for the materials he purchased for the choir or the chanters. In 1913, Christ became the First Chanter in the “new” church of Sheboygan, Wisconsin. He went on to serve in churches in Washington State, California, Texas, and finally Tulsa, Oklahoma. In Tulsa, Christ organized a women’s choir, possibly the first women’s Greek Orthodox choir in America. Later, men joined and it became a typical four-part choir. He recruited and trained 15 other chanters during his tenure and continued as First Chanter until his death in 1973. During his 74 years of service to the church, Christ missed only two Sundays, and that was because of illness. His devotion and stewardship were recognized by Bishops and Archbishops, and he received the title of Tonsured Anagnostis.

v

=== LEAF p8 ===
[Biographical Foreword Continued — Printed Page vi]

Although Christ had no formal music training in his youth, he studied Byzantine music most of his life, and received vocal and instrumental music lessons throughout his time in America. He constantly transcribed Byzantine music into Western notation. In 1945, Christ wrote a concise version of the Typikon. The small book spelled out the important points of the services and pointed out mistakes in the original Violakis Typikon. If there were questions or differences in a section, he suggested how they could be resolved.

The study of the Typikon was a passion for my father, Christ Economou. That is why my family and I wanted to see this book published. This scholarly opus, the new bilingual Typikon, is a polychronion of effort and achievement by talented writers blessed by the Holy Spirit. I think it is fitting that the spiritual vision of a man who was physically blind should be realized in such a glorious way.

James Economou

vi

=== LEAF p9 ===
[Introduction to the Bilingual Edition — Printed Page vii]

INTRODUCTION

The present work makes available to the Greek Orthodox Church in America in English translation the most authoritative guide to the order of its services, namely the Typikon of the Great Church of Christ by George Violakis, Head Chanter (Protopsaltis) of the Patriarchate of Constantinople at the end of the 19th century.

This treatise was composed after extensive study and deliberation by a committee consisting of four hierarchs and the Head Chanter George Violakis, which was appointed by the Holy Synod of the Patriarchate of Constantinople. It was written in its final form by Violakis himself and published in Constantinople in 1888. Thereafter, the Holy Patriarchate established the Violakis Typikon as the sole authoritative document outlining and stipulating the order (taxis) of all the services celebrated within the Church.

Throughout the centuries, the Church has made a continuous effort to make its services more inspiring to its worshipers, thus producing over time several Typika, each one amplifying and refining its predecessor. This sustained effort must have been inspired by St. Paul’s exhortation to us how to conduct our lives as well as how to worship God in His temple: «Πάντα δὲ εὐσχημόνως καὶ κατὰ τάξιν γινέσθω» (“Let everything be done in beauty and order.”) I Corinthians 14.40.

It was this desire to preserve and perpetuate the order and beauty of our church services as an intrinsic, vital part of the experience of worship that impelled Dr. George T. Demos, a devoted, highly trained church musician (a medical physician by profession) to republish the Typikon by George Violakis. He wanted to reassert its sacramental authority and bring it anew to the awareness of our Church in this country by casting the book into a bilingual format, the English translation aligned with and facing the original Greek text exactly, page by opposing page. To make the work more meaningful, Dr. Demos added a dictionary of terms related to the Typikon, which he assiduously compiled and adapted from various sources.

To make the work’s contents more accessible to today’s user, Dr. Demos and I updated the complicated section where the yearly shifting Movable Feasts coincide variously with the Immovable Feasts, whose dates

vii

=== LEAF p10 ===
[Introduction Continued — Printed Page viii]

have been fixed for all time. Since the original Violakis Typikon was based on the Julian Calendar, we put next to each Julian date its exactly corresponding date of the Gregorian Calendar, which is in use in the Church today. See the Chart of the Feasts (Πίναξ τοῦ Ἑορτοδρομίου), pp. 924 ff. [For the order of service as well as the hymnology (text and music) for the liturgies of the Sundays and Immovable Feasts coinciding variously with the Movable Feasts, see Theodore Bogdanos, The Byzantine Liturgy: Hymnology and Order, Denver, Colorado, 1993, pp. 283 ff.]

The English translation was undertaken by Rev. Robert Athas, who, as both scholar and practicing liturgist, brought to this demanding task an expert, intimate knowledge of Orthodox ritual. Fr. Athas had already translated the Triodion section in the Violakis Typikon as his thesis for his Master of Divinity degree at the St. Vladimir Theological Seminary in New York. In time, I was asked by Dr. Demos to contribute to the further refinement of the translation and the work’s editorial form.

George Demos immersed himself in this project for more than 16 years. He defied physical ailments and protracted therapies - even the threat of impending sudden death - in order to finish this work for the Church. It was in the early hours of the morning that he passed away while inserting some final touches into his computer.

After his death, I proceeded to put the work into its final form as we both had conceived it. Its publication was most generously undertaken by Poti Doukas (an aerospace engineer), a gifted member of the Choir of the Assumption Cathedral in Denver, Colorado, and Dr. George Stefanidakis (a retired chemical engineer), a member of the choir and a chanter at Annunciation Cathedral in Houston, Texas. Through his computer expertise, Dr. Stefanidakis carried out several difficult corrections and updated the entire process of printing the final version. In the meantime, James Economou, a former choir director of the Church, in an extraordinary gesture of generosity, had offered to fully finance the publication of the work.

Finally, those of us who have collaborated on this project bring now this book to God as an offering, laying it like a piece of woven, multicolored tapestry at the footsteps of His throne.

Theodore Bogdanos

Note: Dr. Demos fell asleep in the Lord in 2012, his introduction to this book unwritten. Yet, he left behind a full acknowledgement of his indebtedness to those who contributed to the making of this book. This acknowledgement follows here:

viii
