=== LEAF p921 ===
[Original Greek Text: Concerning the Co-Celebration of Clergy (Part 1, p. 906)]

906

ΠΕΡΙ
ΣΥΛΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΟΥ

   Ὅταν τύχωσι πλείονες τοῦ ἑνὸς Ἱερεῖς συλλειτουργοῦντες, ἀφ’ ἑσπέρας ἂν γένηται Εἴσοδος, ἀπαιτοῦνται τρεῖς τοὐλάχιστον Ἱερεῖς καὶ ψάλλουσιν ἔξωθεν ἡμικύκλιον ἀποτελοῦντες¹ ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τοῦ ναοῦ τὸ Φῶς ἱλαρὸν μέχρι τοῦ καὶ ἅγιον Πνεῦμα θεόν, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ Βήματος τὸ ἐπίλοιπον, καὶ μετ’ αὐτὸ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας ἅπαξ ἐκ τοῦ Βήματος καὶ δὶς ἔξωθεν. Εἰς δὲ τὴν Λιτὴν ὁ πρῶτος τῇ τάξει λέγει τὸ Ἐπάκουσον ἡμῶν ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Εἰρήνη πᾶσι· ὁ δεύτερος, τὸ Δέσποτα πολυέλεε· καὶ ὁ τρίτος τὸ Κύριε Ἰησοῦ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός· εἶτα ὁ πρῶτος κατάρχει τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε βοηθούντων καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν· ἀλλ’ αὐτὸς μόνος θυμιᾷ καὶ στρέφει περὶ τοὺς ἄρτους μετὰ τοῦ Διακόνου. Τὸ δὲ πρωῒ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ψάλλουσιν οἱ συλλειτουργοῦντες ἱερεῖς ἐκ τοῦ Βήματος πλέον τῶν συνήθων καὶ τῷ ἑνὶ μόνῳ Λειτουργοῦντι ἱερεῖ, εἰμὴ τὸ Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν καὶ προσπέσωμεν Χριστῷ κατὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, εἶτα τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον (ὅτε καὶ θυμιᾷ ὁ πρῶτος τῇ τάξει τὴν ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν καὶ τὰς Εἰκόνας)· τὸ Κοντάκιον, καὶ τὸ Ἅγιος ὁ Θεὸς τὴν τρίτην φοράν.² Τὰς Ἐκφωνήσεις λέγουσιν ἐξ ὑπαμοιβῆς ὁ εἷς μετὰ τὸν ἄλλον, εὐλογεῖ δὲ τὰ τίμια Δῶρα ὡς καὶ τὸν λαόν, ὁσάκις ἂν δέῃ, ὁ πρῶτος τῇ τάξει, καὶ κοινωνοῦσι τῶν Ἀχράντων Μυστηρίων κατὰ τάξιν ἕκαστος, τοῦ τελευταίου μεταδιδόντος καὶ τῷ Διακόνῳ.

   Ἄν τὸ συλλείτουργον γίνηται ἐξ Ἀρχιερέων, ὁ πρῶτος τῇ τάξει φέρει τὸν Μανδύαν καὶ ἵσταται ἐπὶ τοῦ θρόνου μέχρι τῆς

---
1. Καίτοι πάντες εἰσὶν ἴσοι καὶ ὀφείλουσι τιμᾶν καὶ σέβεσθαι ἀλλήλους, ἀλλὰ προηγοῦνται ἢ κατὰ ἀφφίκια, ἢ κατὰ τὰ πρεσβεῖα τῆς χειροτονίας.
2. Κακῶς τινες τῶν Ἱερέων κατὰ τὰ τελευταῖα ἔτη ἐκ φιλοδοξίας κατακριτέας ψάλλουσι καὶ τὰ Κύριε σῶσον τοὺς εὐσεβεῖς, καὶ μετὰ τὴν δευτέραν Εἴσοδον κρατοῦντες τὰ Ἅγια μνημονεύουσι ζώντων καὶ τεθνεώτων, μὴ ἀρκούμενοι εἰς τὸ περιληπτικὸν καὶ καθιερωμένον Πάντων ἡμῶν μνησθείη Κύριος ὁ Θεός.

*(Printed Page 906)*

=== LEAF p922 ===
[English Facing Translation: Concerning the Co-Celebrant (Part 1, p. 907)]

907

CONCERNING
THE CO-CELEBRANT

   When there are more than one priest co-celebrating, beginning with the evening, at Vespers, if an Entrance is to be performed, at least more than three priests must attend. They sing outside in the middle of the church in a semi-circle,¹ “O Gladsome Light” up to “and Holy Spirit, God.” They complete the rest of the hymn from inside the Holy Sanctuary. After that, the Prokimenon of the day is sung once from the Holy Sanctuary and twice from the outside. At the Liti, the clergyman first in order [rank or order of ordination] says “Hear us, O God” and “Peace be to all”; the second, “O Merciful Master,” and the third “Lord Jesus Christ our God”; then the first begins chanting “Theotokos Virgin” assisted by the others; but only he censes and circles around the Loaves with the Deacon. In the morning, the co-celebrating priests sing nothing from the Holy Sanctuary except the usual and the one celebrating Priest, except “Come let us worship and bow down to Christ” at the Entrance. Then is sung the Apolytikion (during which the first in seniority of ordination censes the Holy Table and the Icons). Then follows the Kontakion, and “Holy God” the third time.² The Exclamations are recited by them in order, alternately one after the other. The clergyman first in order [rank or order of ordination] blesses the Holy Gifts and the people. The clergymen receive the Holy Gifts in order of seniority of ordination, and the last one in seniority gives communion to the Deacon.
   If the co-celebration takes place among Hierarchs, the first in rank wears the Mandya and stands on the throne until the prescribed time. Then,

---
1. Although they are all equal and ought to honor and respect each other, they nevertheless precede each other according to their offikia [offices] or according to seniority of ordination.
2. Wrongly, some priests in recent years, for the love of glory, also sing “Lord, save the pious.” And, after the Second Entrance, as they hold the Holy Gifts, they commemorate the living and the dead, not content to use with the more summary and established “May the Lord God remember us all.”

*(Printed Page 907)*

=== LEAF p923 ===
[Original Greek Text: Concerning Hierarchical Concelebration (Part 2, p. 908)]

908

κεκανονισμένης ὥρας· Εἶτα εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὸ Ἱερὸν δίδωσι καὶ λαμβάνει³ συγχώρησιν παρὰ τῶν μελλόντων συλλειτουργῆσαι καὶ οὕτως ἐνδύονται πάντες. Κατὰ τὴν Δοξολογίαν ἐξέρχονται, προηγουμένων τῶν Ἱερέων, καὶ τελευταῖος ἔρχεται ὁ προεξάρχων φέρων καὶ Μίτραν ἐπὶ κεφαλῆς καὶ τὴν Ποιμαντορικὴν ῥάβδον ἐν τῇ δεξιᾷ χειρί. Κατὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον ψάλλων ἐν συνοδείᾳ καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν Ἀρχιερέων καὶ Ἱερέων τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν εὐλογεῖ μετὰ τῶν δικηροτρικήρων, εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Βῆμα πρῶτος, ἑπομένων τῶν ἄλλων Ἀρχιερέων καὶ Ἱερέων, καὶ θυμιᾷ περὶ τὴν ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν καὶ τὴν Πρόθεσιν, τάς τε ἱερὰς Εἰκόνας ἐκ τῶν Βημοθύρων καὶ τὸν λαὸν ψάλλων τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον⁴ καὶ τελευταῖον τὸ Κοντάκιον. Τὸ Ἅγιος ὁ Θεὸς ἀφοῦ ψαλῇ δὶς ἔξωθεν, τὸ τρίτον λέγεται ἀπὸ τοῦ Βήματος, τὸ τέταρτον ἔξωθεν καὶ αὖθις τὸ πέμπτον ἔσωθεν. Εἶτα, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, ἔξωθεν, ὡς καὶ τὸ Ἅγιος ἀθάνατος, καὶ μετ’ αὐτὸ ψάλλεται πάλιν ἐκ τοῦ Βήματος ἀργότερον τὸ Ἅγιος ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ Στάσεις τέσσαρας ἐναλλὰξ ὑπὸ τῶν δύο δεξιᾷ καὶ ἀριστερᾷ ἱσταμένων Ἀρχιερέων καὶ Ἱερέων καὶ εὐλογεῖ ὁ προεξάρχων διὰ τῶν δικηροτρικήρων λέγων τὸ Κύριε, Κύριε, ἐπίβλεψον ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. Μετὰ τὸ Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, ψάλλεται αὖθις ἔξωθεν ὑπὸ τοῦ δεξιοῦ Χοροῦ τὸ Ἅγιος ὁ Θεός, ἀφοῦ ὁ Διάκονος εἴπῃ τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν Δύναμις. Τότε ψάλλεται ἔσωθεν τὸ Κύριε σῶσον τοὺς εὐσεβεῖς καὶ ἔξωθεν ἐπαναλαμβάνεται δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν Χορῶν· αὖθις ἔσωθεν ψάλλεται τὸ Καὶ ἐπάκουσον ἡμῶν. Εἶτα λέγεται ἡ φήμη τοῦ Πατριάρχου ἅπαξ ἔσωθεν καὶ δὶς ἔξωθεν, καὶ ἂν μὲν ὁ προεξάρχων ᾖ Μητροπολίτης καὶ οἱ συλλειτουργοὶ Ἐπίσκοποι, ψάλλεται καὶ ἡ τοῦ Μητροπολίτου φήμη, ἔσωθέν τε καὶ ἔξωθεν· ἂν δὲ πάντες ὦσι Μητροπολῖται ἢ πάντες Ἐπίσκοποι, παραλείπεται ἡ φήμη τοῦ πρώτου τῇ τάξει. Ἐν ἑκάστῃ εὐλογίας περιπτώσει εὐλογεῖ ὁ πρῶτος τῇ τάξει, καὶ οὗτος λαμβάνει τὰ Ἅγια ἐκ τῶν χειρῶν τοῦ Διακόνου καὶ τοῦ Ἱερέως κατὰ τὴν δευτέραν Εἴσοδον καὶ μνημονεύει ζώντων τε καὶ τεθνεώτων· ἀλλ’ αἱ Ἐκφωνήσεις διανέμονται κατὰ σειρὰν εἰς τρόπον μέχρι καὶ τῶν συλλειτουργούντων Ἱερέων. Τὰ Ἅγια εὐλογεῖ μόνον ὁ προεξάρχων, ἀλλ’ οἱ Ἀρχιερεῖς κοινωνοῦσι τῶν Ἀχράντων Μυστηρίων ἰδίᾳ χειρί, οἱ δὲ Ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ Διάκονοι μετέχουσι τούτων παρὰ τοῦ τελευταίου τῇ τάξει Ἀρχιερέως.

---
3. Ἐὰν ὦσιν Ἐπίσκοποι καὶ ὁ προεξάρχων Μητροπολίτης αὐτῶν ἢ Μητροπολῖται καὶ ὁ προεξάρχων Πατριάρχης, ἀσπάζονται τὴν τούτου χεῖρα.
4. Ἐὰν ᾖ Μνημόσυνον, ψάλλεται ἐκ τοῦ Βήματος μετὰ τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τῆς ἡμέρας Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ τὸ τῶν Κεκοιμημένων Μνήσθητι Κύριε ὡς ἀγαθὸς τῶν δούλων σου.

*(Printed Page 908)*

=== LEAF p924 ===
[English Facing Translation: Concerning Hierarchical Concelebration (Part 2, p. 909)]

909

entering the Holy Sanctuary, he gives and receives³ forgiveness from his future co-celebrants, and thus they all vest. During the Doxology they exit the Holy Sanctuary preceded by the Priests, the last one to exit being the Chief Celebrant bearing the Miter on his head and the Pastoral Staff in his right hand. At the Entrance, singing with the rest of the Hierarchs and the Priests the Entrance Hymn, he blesses with the Dikirotrikira, enters the Holy Sanctuary first followed by the other Hierarchs and Priests, and censes around the Holy Table and the Prothesis*, the Icons and the people from the gates of the Holy Sanctuary, chanting the Apolytikion⁴ and lastly the Kontakion. The “Holy God,” after it is sung twice outside, the third is sung from the Holy Sanctuary, the fourth outside, and immediately the fifth inside. Then “Glory, Now and ever” outside, as well as “Holy Immortal”; and after that, again from the Holy Sanctuary “Holy God” is sung in a slower tempo in four segments alternately by the two ranks of Hierarchs and Priests standing on the right side and on the left. The Chief Celebrant blesses with the Dikirotrikira, chanting “Lord, Lord, look down from heaven.” After “Have mercy on us,” the right Choir sings “Holy God [the entire Trisagios Hymn]” as soon as the Deacon proclaims “Dynamis! [with Strength!]” Then, inside the Holy Sanctuary is sung “Lord, save the faithful”; it is repeated twice outside by the Choirs; then, inside is sung “And hear us.” Then the Fimi [Acclamation] of the Patriarch is sung once inside and twice outside. If the presiding Hierarch is a Metropolitan and the co-celebrants are Bishops, then the Fimi [Acclamation] of the Metropolitan is also sung, inside and outside; if they are all Metropolitans or all Bishops, the Fimi of the clergyman first in rank is omitted. In every situation of a blessing, the first in rank blesses, and he is the one who receives the Holy Gifts from the hands of the Deacon and the Priest during the Second Entrance and he commemorates the living and the dead; but the exclamations are divided in order and manner even down to the co-celebrating Priests. The Holy Gifts are blessed only by the Chief Celebrant, but the Hierarchs take communion by their own hand; the Priests and Deacons receive the Gifts from the Hierarch last in seniority of ordination.

---
3. If they are Bishops and their Presiding Metropolitan, or Metropolitans and their Presiding Patriarch, the former kiss the right hand of the latter in either case.
4. If there is a Memorial Service, after the Apolytikion of the Saint of the day, the Apolytikion of the departed “Remember, O Lord Your servants” is chanted from the Holy Sanctuary.
* [The table inside the Holy Sanctuary on which the Holy Gifts are prepared for the Holy Eucharist.]

*(Printed Page 909)*

=== LEAF p925 ===
[Original Greek Text: Funeral Service for Those Fallen Asleep (Part 1, p. 910)]

910

ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΙΑ ΝΕΚΡΩΣΙΜΟΣ
ΕΙΣ
ΚΟΙΜΗΘΕΝΤΑΣ (1)

   Τελευτήσαντός τινος τῶν εὐσεβῶν, προσκαλεῖται παρὰ τῶν Συγγενῶν αὐτοῦ ὁ ἱερὸς Κλῆρος· ἐλθόντες δὲ εἰς τὸν οἶκον, ἐν ᾧ τὸ λείψανον κεῖται, ἐὰν ᾖ καὶ Ἀρχιερεύς, λαμβάνουσι καιρὸν οἱ Ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ Διάκονοι· καὶ οἱ μὲν Ἱερεῖς βάλλουσιν Ἐπιτραχήλια, οἱ δὲ Διάκονοι ἐνδύονται Στιχάρια καὶ Ὠράρια κρατοῦντες θυμιατὰ καὶ δικηροτρίκηρα, τότε εἷς Ἱερεὺς μετὰ Διακόνου εἰσέρχονται ὅπου ὁ νεκρὸς κεῖται, καὶ ὁ μὲν Διάκονος ἐκφωνεῖ Εὐλόγησον Δέσποτα, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, ὁ Διάκονος τὸ Τρισάγιον(2), ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν, καὶ ψάλλουσιν εἰς ἦχον δ΄ τὰ Τροπάρια Μετὰ πνευμάτων δικαίων τετελειωμένων· Εἰς τὴν κατάπαυσίν σου Κύριε, ὅπου πάντες οἱ Ἅγιοί σου ἀναπαύονται· Δόξα, Σὺ εἶ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, Καὶ νῦν, Ἡ μόνη Ἁγνὴ καὶ Ἄχραντος Παρθένος. Εἶτα ὁ Διάκονος Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεός, κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου . . . ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ ἀναπαύσεως (καὶ συγχωρήσεως(3)) τῆς ψυχῆς τοῦ κεκοιμημένου δούλου [τοῦ Θεοῦ] σου (δεῖνα)(4), καὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ συγχωρηθῆναι αὐτῷ πᾶν πλημμέλημα ἑκούσιόν τε καὶ ἀκούσιον, ὅπως Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς τάξῃ τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ, ἔνθα οἱ δίκαιοι ἀναπαύονται κλπ. Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, ὁ Ἱερεὺς τὴν Εὐχὴν Ὁ Θεὸς τῶν Πνευμάτων, καὶ τὴν νεκρώσιμον Ἀπόλυσιν. Εἶτα ἄραντες τὸ λείψανον προπορευομένων τῶν Ἱερέων μετὰ λαμπάδων καὶ τῶν

---
(1) (Ἡ Ἀγγλικὴ μετάφρασις τῆς Νεκρωσίμου Ἀκολουθίας εἶναι τοῦ Sacramental Services, vol. 3, Narthex Press, Northridge, CA., 1995.)
(2) (Ἡ λέξις Τρισάγιον ἐδῶ ἐννοεῖ τὸ Ἅγιος ὁ Θεός, Παναγία Τριάς, καὶ τὴν Κυριακὴν Προσευχήν.)
(3) (Αὐτὴ ἡ φράσις παραλείπεται εἰς πολλὰ σύγχρονα τεύχη, πιθανὸν ὡς περιττή.)
(4) (Τὸ τεῦχος τοῦ Βιολάκη ἔχει μόνον «τοῦ δούλου σου»)

*(Printed Page 910)*

=== LEAF p926 ===
[English Facing Translation: Funeral Service for Those Fallen Asleep (Part 1, p. 911)]

911

THE FUNERAL SERVICE
FOR
THOSE WHO HAVE FALLEN ASLEEP (1)

   Upon the death of one of the faithful, the Clergy are summoned by the family; coming to the home where the remains of the deceased are, if a Hierarch is present, the Priests and Deacons receive keron [his blessing] from him. The Priests wear Epitrachilia and the Deacons wear Sticharia and Oraria, carrying censers and Dikirotrikira. Then one of the Priests with a Deacon enter where the deceased is laying, and the Deacon exclaims “Father, give the blessing.” The Priest: “Blessed is our God”; the Deacon: the Trisagion(2); the Priest: “For Yours is.” Then they sing in Mode IV the Hymns “Among the spirits of the righteous made perfect . . . In Your place of rest, O Lord, where all Your Saints repose. Glory . . . You are our God . . . Now and ever . . . O Virgin, alone pure and undefiled.” Then the Deacon: “Have mercy on us, O God, in Your great goodness . . . Again we pray for the repose {and forgiveness}(3) of the soul of {God's} servant(4) (Name) departed this life, and for the forgiveness of his/her/their every sin, whether deliberate or unintended, that the Lord God will establish this soul where the righteous dwell etc. Let us pray to the Lord.” The Priest: the Prayer “God of spirits . . . ,” and the Dismissal Prayers of the Deceased. Then carrying the corpse, preceded by the Priests bearing candles, and by the Deacons in front of the Hierarch wearing the Mandya and holding the Pastoral Staff, and the Chanters singing “Holy

---
(1) (The English translation of the Funeral Service used here is that of Sacramental Services, vol. 3, Narthex Press, Northridge, California, 1995.)
(2) (Trisagion, as used here, is understood to include “Holy God,” “All-holy Trinity” and the Lord's Prayer.)
(3) (This phrase seems to be omitted in many of the current texts. Perhaps it has been viewed as redundant.)
(4) (The original text of Violakis reads only “Your servant.”)

*(Printed Page 911)*

=== LEAF p927 ===
[Original Greek Text: Funeral Office in the Temple (Part 2, p. 912)]

912

Διακόνων ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ Ἀρχιερέως φέροντος Μανδύαν καὶ Ράβδον, καὶ τῶν Ψαλτῶν ψαλλόντων τὸ Ἅγιος ὁ Θεὸς [*] ἀπερχόμεθα εἰς τὸν ναόν, ἀφ’ οὗ δὲ εἰσέλθωμεν τὸ μὲν λείψανον ἀποτίθεται ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τοῦ Ναοῦ, ὁ δὲ Ἀρχιερεὺς εὐλογήσας διὰ τρικηρίου ἀνέρχεται εἰς τὸν θρόνον, ὁ Διάκονος ἐκφωνεῖ Εὐλόγησον Δέσποτα, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν πάντοτε νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων καὶ εὐθὺς οἱ Χοροὶ ἄρχονται ψάλλειν εἰς ἦχον πλάγιον τοῦ β΄.

   Ἄμωμοι ἐν ὁδῷ, Ἀλληλούϊα.

   Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Κύριε, δίδαξόν με τὰ δικαιώματά σου. Ἀλληλούϊα. (εἰς τὸ τέλος ἑκάστου στίχου ψάλλεται τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα.
   Ἐπεπόθησεν ἡ ψυχή μου τοῦ ἐπιθυμῆσαι τὰ κρίματά σου ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ.
   Ἐνύσταξεν ἡ ψυχή μου ἀπὸ ἀκηδίας, βεβαίωσόν με ἐν τοῖς λόγοις σου.
   Κλῖνον τὴν καρδίαν μου εἰς τὰ μαρτύριά σου καὶ μὴ εἰς πλεονεξίαν.
   Ἀθυμία κατέσχε με ἀπὸ ἁμαρτωλῶν τῶν ἐγκαταλιμπανόντων τὸν νόμον σου.
   Μέτοχος ἐγώ εἰμι πάντων τῶν φοβουμένων σε, καὶ τῶν φυλασσόντων τὰς ἐντολάς σου.
   Δόξα Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱῷ . . . Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεί . . . Ἀλληλούϊα.
   Ὁ Διάκονος Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεός, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς Ὅτι σὺ εἶ ἡ ἀνάστασις, καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ Χορὸς εἰς ἦχον πλάγιον τοῦ α΄.
   Αἱ χεῖρές σου ἐποίησάν με καὶ ἔπλασάν με, συνέτισόν με, καὶ μαθήσομαι τὰς ἐντολάς σου. Ἐλέησόν με Κύριε (εἰς τὸ τέλος ἑκάστου στίχου ψάλλεται τὸ Ἐλέησόν με Κύριε).
   Ὅτι ἐγεννήθην ὡς ἀσκὸς ἐν πάχνῃ, τὰ δικαιώματά σου οὐκ ἐπελαθόμην.
   Σός εἰμι ἐγώ, σῶσόν με, ὅτι τὰ δικαιώματά σου ἐξεζήτησα.
   Ἀπὸ τῶν κριμάτων σου οὐκ ἐξέκλινα, ὅτι σὺ ἐνομοθέτησάς με.

---
[*] Εἰς μεταγενεστέρους χρόνους, αἱ ἀποστάσεις μεταξὺ τῶν οἰκιῶν τῶν τεθνεώτων, τῆς ἐκκλησίας, καὶ τοῦ τάφου εἶναι σημαντικῶς μεγαλύτεραι τῶν ἰδίων ἀποστάσεων τῆς ἐποχῆς τῆς ἐκδόσεως τοῦ Τυπικοῦ (1888). Ἑπομένως οἱ ὕμνοι οἱ συνοδεύοντες τὰ ὀχήματα ψάλλονται εἰς διαφορετικὰς τοποθεσίας. Π.χ. τὸ ἀρχικὸν ἀσματικὸν Τρισάγιον ἀρχίζει ὅταν τὸ φέρετρον εἰσέλθῃ ἐκ τῶν ἔξωθεν εἰς τὸν νάρθηκα μέχρις ὅτου φθάσῃ εἰς τὸν σολέα καὶ μέχρι τῆς ἀρχῆς τῆς Νεκρωσίμου Ἀκολουθίας.

*(Printed Page 912)*

=== LEAF p928 ===
[English Facing Translation: Funeral Office in the Temple (Part 2, p. 913)]

913

God,” [*] we come into the Church. After we enter, the corpse is placed in the center of the Church. The Hierarch, blessing with the Trikirion, ascends his Throne. The Deacon exclaims “Bless Master”; the Hierarch: “Blessed is our God, now and forever and from all ages to all ages,” and immediately the Choirs begin to sing in Mode II Plagal [Heirmologic], the following:

   Blessed are those whose way is blameless. Alleluia.

   Blessed are You, O Lord, teach me Your Commandments. Alleluia.
(The Alleluia is chanted at the end of each of the following verses.)
   My soul has always longed for Your judgments.

   My soul has grown weary from sorrow; strengthen me with Your words.

   Incline my heart to Your revelations, and not to greed.

   Despair took hold of me because of the sinners who spurn Your law.

   I am a companion of all who fear You, and of those who keep Your commands.

   Glory to the Father and the Son . . . Now and ever . . . Alleluia.
   The Deacon: “Have mercy on us, O God”; the Hierarch: “For You are the Resurrection”; and the Second Choir begins in Mode I Plagal:
   Your hands have made me and formed me; enlighten me that I may learn Your commandments. Have mercy on me, O Lord. (At the end of each phrase we sing “Have mercy on me, O Lord.”)
   For I have shriveled like a wineskin in the frost, yet I have not forgotten Your just decrees.
   I am Your own; save me, for I have sought Your commandments.
   I have not spurned Your judgments, for you have instructed me.

---
[*] (In later times, the distances between the home of the deceased, the church, and the burial ground have generally become considerably greater than those at the time of the publication of the Typikon (1888). As a result of these increased distances from point to point, the hymns accompanying the route of the casket are now chanted at different locations. For example, the initial Trisagios Hymn (Holy God, etc.) begins to be sung when the casket enters the Narthex from the outside and continues to be sung up to the point when the casket arrives at the Soleas and up to the beginning of the Funeral Service proper.)

*(Printed Page 913)*

=== LEAF p929 ===
[Original Greek Text: Funeral Office: Third Stasis and Evlogitaria (Part 3, p. 914)]

914

   Ἔκλινα τὴν καρδίαν μου, τοῦ ποιῆσαι τὰ δικαιώματά σου εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα δι’ ἀντάμειψιν.
   Καιρὸς τοῦ ποιῆσαι τῷ Κυρίῳ, διεσκέδασαν τὸν νόμον σου.
   Δόξα Πατρί, Καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεί, Ἐλέησόν με Κύριε, Κύριε.

   Ὁ Διάκονος Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς (ἢ ὁ Ἱερεύς) Ὅτι σὺ εἶ ἡ ἀνάστασις, καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ α΄ Χορὸς εἰς ἦχον πλάγιον τοῦ δ΄.
   Καὶ ἐλέησόν με. Ἀλληλούϊα.
   Ἐπίβλεψον ἐπ’ ἐμὲ καὶ ἐλέησόν με, κατὰ τὸ κρῖμα τῶν ἀγαπώντων τὸ ὄνομά σου. Ἀλληλούϊα.
   Νεώτερος ἐγώ εἰμι καὶ ἐξουδενωμένος, τὰ δικαιώματά σου οὐκ ἐπελαθόμην. Ἀλληλούϊα.
   Τῆς φωνῆς μου ἄκουσον, Κύριε, κατὰ τὸ ἔλεός σου, κατὰ τὸ κρῖμά σου ζῆσόν με. Ἀλληλούϊα.
   Ἄρχοντες κατεδίωξάν με δωρεάν, καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν λόγων σου ἐδειλίασεν ἡ καρδία μου. Ἀλληλούϊα.
   Ζήσεται ἡ ψυχή μου καὶ αἰνέσει σε, καὶ τὰ κρίματά σου βοηθήσει μοι.
   Ἐπλανήθην ὡς πρόβατον ἀπολωλός· ζήτησον τὸν δοῦλόν σου, ὅτι τὰς ἐντολάς σου οὐκ ἐπελαθόμην.
   Καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Διάκονος Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, ὁ Ἱερεὺς Ὅτι σὺ εἶ ἡ ἀνάστασις, καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ Χορὸς τὰ Εὐλογητάρια.

   Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Κύριε, δίδαξόν με τὰ δικαιώματά σου.
   Τῶν Ἁγίων ὁ χορὸς εὗρε πηγὴν τῆς ζωῆς (ἐν ἑκάστῳ Τροπαρίῳ τῶν Εὐλογηταρίων προψάλλεται τὸ Εὐλογητὸς εἶ Κύριε).

— Ὁ παλάμῃ, (ὁ πάλαι μεν) ἐκ μὴ ὄντων πλάσας με.[5] —
Εἰκών εἰμι τῆς ἀρρήτου δόξης σου.— Ἀνάπαυσον ὁ Θεὸς τὸν δοῦλόν

---
(5) (Τὸ τεῦχος τοῦ Βιολάκη, Ὁ παλάμῃ, εὑρίσκεται εἰς διαφόρους πηγάς, ὡς ὁ Μουσικὸς Πανδέκτης, Ἀθῆναι, 1936, τόμος 3, σελ. 376, καὶ τοῦ Νίκου Καριτσιώτη Μουσικὸν Ἁγιασματάριον, Ἀθῆναι, 1951, σελ. 33. Περισσότεραι καὶ πλέον αὐθεντικαὶ πηγαὶ ὡς τὸ Μέγα Εὐχολόγιον, Βενετία, 1867, (ἀνατυπωθὲν ἐν Ἀθήναις, 1986), σελ. 407, καὶ τὸ Μικρὸν Εὐχολόγιον, Ἀποστολικὴ Διακονία, Ἀθῆναι, 1956, σελ. 201, ἔχουν τὸ τεῦχος Ὁ πάλαι μέν.)

*(Printed Page 914)*

=== LEAF p930 ===
[English Facing Translation: Funeral Office: Third Stasis and Evlogitaria (Part 3, p. 915)]

915

   In return, [for Your mercies] my heart is set on following Your commandments until the ages of ages.
   It is time for the Lord to act: for they have broken Your law.
   Glory to the Father and the Son . . . Now and ever . . . Have mercy, on me, Lord, Lord.
   Deacon: “Have mercy on us, O God”; the Hierarch (or the Priest): “For You are the Resurrection”; and the First Choir begins in Mode IV Plagal the following:
   And have mercy on me. Alleluia.
   Look upon me and be gracious to me, as to those who love Your name. Alleluia.
   I am young and despised, but have not forgotten Your commandments. Alleluia.
   Hear my voice, O Lord, in Your steadfast love, quicken me in Your justice. Alleluia.
   Princes have pursued me without cause, but my heart stands in awe of Your words. Alleluia,
   My soul shall live and praise You, and Your law shall be my support.
   Like a lost sheep, I have gone astray. Seek Your servant, for I have not forgotten Your commandments.
   And immediately, the Deacon: “Have mercy on us, O God”; the Priest: “For You are the Resurrection”; and the Second Choir begins the EvlogitApplication [Evlogitaria]:
   “Blessed are You, O Lord, teach me Your commandments.”
   The choir of the Saints has found the source of life” (each hymn of the Evlogitaria is preceded by the Verse “Blessed are You, O Lord, teach me Your commandments.”)
— With the palm of Your hand {of old}[5] You formed me out of nothing. — I am an image of Your indescribable glory. — Give rest, O God, to Your servant. — Glory . . . Let us devoutly praise the one Godhead as radiant Trinity. — Now and ever . . . Hail, majestic Lady, who for our

---
[5] (Violakis' version “O palami” (“With the palm of Your hand”) is found in various sources, such as the Musikos Pandektis, Athens, 1936, vol 3, p. 376, and Nikos Karitsiotis, Musikon Agiasmatarion, Athens, 1951, p. 33. More numerous sources, including the more authoritative Mega Efchologion as well as the Mikron Efchologion have “O pale men” (“of old”). See the Mega Efchologion, Venice, 1862 (reprinted in Athens, 1986), p. 407, and Mikron Efchologion, Apostoliki Diakonia, Athens, 1956, p. 201.)

*(Printed Page 915)*
