=== LEAF p191 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross Concl. / Saturday and Sunday after the Exaltation (p. 176)]

176

Εἰσοδικὸν Ὑψοῦτε Κύριον τὸν θεὸν ἡμῶν καὶ προσκυνεῖτε τῷ ὑποποδίῳ τῶν ποδῶν αὐτοῦ, ὅτι Ἅγιός ἐστι, Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ ὁ σαρκὶ Σταυρωθείς, ψάλλοντάς σοι, Ἀλληλούϊα· τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σῶσον Κύριε, τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ Ὑψωθείς, ἀντὶ τοῦ Τρισαγίου τὸν Σταυρόν σου προσκυνοῦμεν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος Ὁ λόγος ὁ τοῦ Σταυροῦ, τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Συμβούλιον ἐποίησαν οἱ Ἀρχιερεῖς μέχρι τοῦ κλίνας τὴν κεφαλὴν παρέδωκε τὸ πνεῦμα. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Μυστικὸς εἶ θεοτόκε, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐσημειώθη ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σῶσον Κύριε, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ἐν ᾗ ἄν ἡμέρᾳ τύχῃ ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς Ὑψώσεως, ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρας, Προκείμενον ψάλλεται τὸ Ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ. Προσεπισημιωτέον ὅτι ἐν τῇ πανσέπτῳ ταύτῃ ἑορτῇ, φερούσῃ τὰ ἴσα τῆς ἁγίας καὶ Μ. Παρασκευῆς, τελοῦμεν νηστείαν, μόνον δὲ ἂν συμπέσῃ ἐν Σαββάτῳ ἢ Κυριακῇ, γίνεται κατάλυσις οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου.
8.    Σαββάτῳ μετὰ τὴν Ὕψωσιν. Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ ψάλλεται ἡ ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ ἐνδιάτακτος μεθέορτος τοῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ Ἀκολουθία, ἐν τῷ Ὄρθρῳ λέγονται οἱ Κανόνες τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ τυχόντος Ἁγίου χῦμα, εἰς τὴν η΄ Ὠδὴν ψάλλεται ὁ Εἱρμὸς καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν μετὰ τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον τοῦ τυχόντος Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ μικροῦ Ἑσπερινοῦ, ὡς καὶ τὸ Δόξα Καὶ νῦν. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, μετὰ δὲ τὴν Εἴσοδον Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν ... ὁ σαρκὶ σταυρωθείς, Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ Κοντάκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Σαββάτου μετὰ τὴν Ὕψωσιν, εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
9.    Κυριακῇ μετὰ τὴν Ὕψωσιν. Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς μεθέορτα δ΄. Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς μεθέορτον, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον, Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
10.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, τὸ

*(Printed Page 176)*

=== LEAF p192 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross Concl. / Saturday and Sunday after the Exaltation (p. 177)]

177

Isodikon [Entrance Hymn] “Extol the Lord our God; worship at his footstool. For He is holy! O Son of God, crucified in the flesh, save us who sing to You: Alleluia!” The Apolytikion “O Lord, save Your people” and the Kontakion “Lifted up of Your own will upon the Cross.” Instead of the Trisagios Hymn, we sing “We venerate Your Cross”; the Apostolos “The preaching of the Cross”; the Gospel “At that time the chief Priests and elders of the people took counsel” until “bowing His head, He gave up his spirit.” At “Especially,” “O Theotokos, you are a mystical Paradise,” Kinonikon [Communion Hymn] “The light of Your countenance is marked upon us, O Lord.” The Apolytikion “O Lord, save Your people,” and Dismissal.
    It must be noted that, no matter on what day the Feast of the Elevation occurs, in the Vespers of that day, the following Prokimenon with its verses is sung: “Our God is in the heavens and on earth.” Also note that this Feast is equal in stature to Holy and Great Friday. It is observed as a fast. Only if the Feast occurs on a Saturday or Sunday, may wine and oil be consumed.
8.    Saturday after the Elevation: In Vespers, we sing the Post-feast Vespers of the day as prescribed in the Mineon; in Matins the Canons of the Feast and of the occurring Saint are read; at the 9th Ode, the Irmos is sung and then the “More honorable” followed by the Exapostilarion of the Saint and that of the Feast. At the Praises: the Aposticha as well as the Glory, Now and ever of the Small Vespers. In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, with the Isodikon “Come let us worship...who was crucified,” Apolytikion and Kontakion of the Feast. Apostolos and Gospel of the Saturday after the Elevation. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Blessed are those whom you have chosen,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
9.    Sunday after the Elevation. On Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Post-feast, Glory of the Post-feast, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever of the Post-feast; the Resurrection Apolytikion and that of the Feast (once each), and Dismissal.
10.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion twice, and the Feast’s once, the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata

*(Printed Page 177)*

=== LEAF p193 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — Sunday after the Exaltation Concl. / September 16: St. Euphemia (p. 178)]

178

Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τοῦ τυχόντος Ἁγίου καὶ μεθέορτον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα Στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, καὶ μεθέορτον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα δ΄. Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινον, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
11.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς ἑορτῆς· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ ὑψωθείς. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Ὕψωσιν. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Ις΄.    Τῆς ἁγίας ἐνδόξου Μεγαλομάρτυρος καὶ πανευφήμου Εὐφημίας.

12.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῆς Ἁγίας ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὥς ἐστι διετεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων τοῦ τιμίου Σταυροῦ.
13.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, μεθέορτα τοῦ Σταυροῦ γ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας γ΄, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας Ἡ διηνθισμένη ταῖς ἀρεταῖς, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον Εἰς Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τὰ τῆς Ἁγίας, Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον, Ἀπολυτίκια· τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
14.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα μετὰ τῶν μεθεόρτων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἁγίας· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῆς Ἁγίας

*(Printed Page 178)*

=== LEAF p194 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — Sunday after the Exaltation Concl. / September 16: St. Euphemia (p. 179)]

179

and one of the Feast in place of each of the Theotokia; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint of the day and the Post-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the order of the Matins Gospel; then we sing “More honorable,” the Resurrection Exapostilarion and that of the Post-feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Post-feast, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
11.    In the Liturgy, the Typika, and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Feast. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Lifted up on the Cross.” The Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday after the Elevation. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise the Lord,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 16th    The Holy Glorious Great-martyr and all-celebrated Euphemia.

12.    If the commemoration of the Saint occurs on any day other than Sunday, the Service is chanted as prescribed in the Mineon together with the hymns of the Post-feast of the Precious Cross.
13.    If the Feast occurs on Sunday, Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Stichira of the Post-feast of the Cross and 3 of the Saint. Glory of the Saint “The one decorated by virtues,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Post-feast; the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saint, and that of the Feast, and Dismissal.
14.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and those of the Post-feast in place of each of the Theotokia; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Feast, and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the

*(Printed Page 179)*

=== LEAF p195 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 16: St. Euphemia Concl. / September 20: St. Eustathius / September 21: Apodosis of the Exaltation (p. 180)]

180

καὶ μεθέορτον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα Στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν· Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.
15.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Ἁγίας δ΄, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ Ὑψωθείς, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν [Ὕψωσιν.] Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ Κ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Μεγαλομάρτυρος Εὐσταθίου καὶ τῶν συν αὐτῷ.

16.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, μεθέορτα γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον τὰ εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἁγίου, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ ναοῦ. Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Ὕψωσιν κτλ.

Τῇ ΚΑ΄.    Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις τῆς ἑορτῆς τῆς Ὑψώσεως.

17.    Τῇ ΚΑ΄ τοῦ μηνὸς ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία ἀπαραλλάκτως ὡς ἐν τῇ κυρίᾳ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἡμέρᾳ, ἐξαιρουμένων ἐν μὲν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῶν Ἀναγνωσμάτων, ἐν δὲ τῷ

*(Printed Page 180)*

=== LEAF p196 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 16: St. Euphemia Concl. / September 20: St. Eustathius / September 21: Apodosis of the Exaltation (p. 181)]

181

Saint and of the Post-feast; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” The Resurrection Exapostilarion, that of the Saint and that of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Saint, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
15.    In the Liturgy, the Typika, and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saint. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Lifted up on the Cross”; Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday after the Elevation. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 20th.    The Holy Great-martyr Efstathios and Those with Him.

16.    If the Feast occurs on Sunday, Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira, 3 Stichira of the Post-feast and 3 of the Saint, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Post-feast, The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saint, and that of the Feast, and Dismissal. In Matins, at “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Feast, and of the Saint. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint; the Resurrection Exapostilarion, that of the Saint and that of the Feast. In the Liturgy, after the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, of the Feast, of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Lifted up on the Cross”; Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday after the Elevation, etc.

The 21st.    The Apodosis [Leave-taking] of the Feast of the Elevation [of the Holy Cross].

17.    The Leave-taking of the Elevation takes place on the 21st of the month, and the Service is chanted exactly as on the day of the Feast, with the following exception. In Vespers: the Psalter and the Readings; in Matins:

*(Printed Page 181)*

=== LEAF p197 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 21: Apodosis of the Exaltation Concl. / Seasonal Rubric (p. 182)]

182

Ὄρθρῳ τῆς Λιτῆς, τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου τοῦ Ὄρθρου, καὶ τοῦ Πολυελέου· καὶ ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τὰ τῆς ἡμέρας, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐσημειώθη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σῶσον Κύριε, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
18.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Ἀπόδοσις ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς ς΄, Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δὶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

19.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος· εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον ἅπαξ, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς· τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος· τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῶν δύο Καταβασιῶν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄. Δόξα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, [Μ. Δοξολογία] καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

20.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἰς τὸ β Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ σαρκὶ σταυρωθείς, εἶτα τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν Ὕψωσιν. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ διὰ βρώσεως τοῦ ξύλου, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐσημειώθη ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς, τὸ Σῶσον Κύριε καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι μετὰ τὴν Ἀπόδοσιν τῆς ἑορτῆς τῇ α΄ Κυριακῇ ἢ τῇ α΄ συμπεσούσῃ ἑορτῇ Καταβασίαι ψάλλονται Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου μέχρι τῆς ΚΑ΄ Νοεμβρίου καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν μέχρι τῆς Η΄ Νοεμβρίου.

*(Printed Page 182)*

=== LEAF p198 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 21: Apodosis of the Exaltation Concl. / Seasonal Rubric (p. 183)]

183

the Liti, the Gospel of Matins and the Polyeleos. In the Liturgy, the Apostolos and Gospel of the day are recited. Kinonikon [Communion Hymn] “The light of Your countenance is marked upon us, O Lord,” the Apolytikion “O Lord, save Your people,” and Dismissal.
18.    If the Leave-taking occurs on a Sunday, on Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira and 6 Stichira of the Feast, Glory of the Feast, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever of the Feast; the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast twice, and Dismissal.
19.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection Apolytikion once and the Feast’s twice; the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and the Kathismata of the Feast in place of the Resurrection Theotokia; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Feast once; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the order of the Matins Gospel; then we sing the 9th Ode of the Feast with the two Katavasie; the Resurrection Exapostilarion and the two Exapostilaria of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and the 3 Stichira of the Feast, repeating the first, Glory of the Feast, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” [the Great Doxology] and “Today salvation”.
20.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast, at the 2nd Antiphon “Who was crucified in the flesh,” then the Isodikon of the Feast with “who is risen from the dead.” The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Lifted up on the Cross of Your own will.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday after the Elevation. At “Especially,” “Through the eating of the tree,” Communion Hymn “The light of Your countenance,” [the Apolytikion] “O Lord, save Your people,” and Dismissal.
    It must be noted that after the Leave-taking of the Feast, on the first Sunday or the first Feast that occurs, the Katavasie to be chanted are “I shall open my mouth,” sung until November 21, and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians,” sung until November 8.

*(Printed Page 183)*

=== LEAF p199 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 23: Conception of the Forerunner / September 24: Miracle of Kythera & St. Thecla (p. 184)]

184

Τῇ ΚΓ΄.    Ἡ Σύλληψις τοῦ τιμίου Προδρόμου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ. Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββ. ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Προδρόμου δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Προδρόμου, Καὶ νῦν Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, Ἀπολυτίκια, τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Προδρόμου, Ἡ πρῴην οὐ τίκτουσα, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυρ. εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὴν ἐξ ἔθους Ἀκολουθίαν τῆς Κυριακῆς, οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι ὅ, τε Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Προδρόμου, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Θυμιῶντι ἐν Ναῷ, [Δόξα,] Καὶ νῦν, Κατεπλάγη Ἰωσήφ, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου κτλ. Ἐξαποστειλάρια, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ δ΄ τοῦ Προδρόμου. Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ., Σήμερον σωτηρία καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, Ἀπόστολος τοῦ Προδρόμου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῇ ΚΔ.    Μνήμη τοῦ γεγονότος Θαύματος παρὰ τῆς Θεομήτορος ἐν τῇ νήσῳ Κυθήρων, καὶ τῆς ἁγίας πρωτομάρτυρος καὶ Ἰσαποστόλου Θέκλης.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τῆς Θεοτόκου γ΄ καὶ τῆς ἁγίας Θέκλης γ΄. Δόξα Τίς μὴ θαυμάσῃ; Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς Θεοτόκου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τῆς Ἁγίας Καὶ νῦν τῆς Θεοτόκου, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τῆς

*(Printed Page 184)*

=== LEAF p200 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 23: Conception of the Forerunner / September 24: Miracle of Kythera & St. Thecla (p. 185)]

185

The 23rd.    The Conception [by Elizabeth] of the honorable Forerunner.

1.    If the Feast occurs on any day other than Sunday, the Service is chanted as prescribed in the Mineon. In Matins the Katavasie “I shall open my mouth” and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians”.

2.    If the Feast occurs on Sunday, then Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Resurrection Stichira and 3 Stichira of the Forerunner, Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Forerunner, Now and ever, “My maker and Saviour”; the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Forerunner “You, the barren one,” the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after the customary Service of Sunday, the Canons both of the Resurrection and of the Forerunner. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma “Censing in the Temple,” and [Glory,] Now and ever, “Joseph struck with wonder”; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints of the day; the Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” etc. The Resurrection Exapostilarion, that of the Forerunner and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Forerunner, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.” Then follows the Liturgy, Apostolos of the Forerunner and Gospel of the Sunday, Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

The 24th.    Commemoration of the Miracle by the Theotokos on the island of Kythyra, and of the holy Protomartyr and Equal of the Apostles Thekla.

1.    If the commemoration occurs on Sunday, then in Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 Stichira of the Theotokos, and 3 of Saint Thekla, Glory, “Who will not wonder?” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings of the Theotokos. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Saint, Now and ever of the Theotokos. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saint, and of the Theotokos

*(Printed Page 185)*
