=== LEAF p391 ===
[Original Greek Text: Feast of the Meeting of our Lord; Situation II Concl. (§ 11 concl. – § 13); Sunday After the Feast in Triodion (p. 376)]

376

ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δίς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

12.	Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου (ὅταν ὑπάρχῃ), Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, Καθίσματα Ἀναστάσιμα δύο καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Χορὸς Ἀγγελικός, αὖθις δύο Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὁ ὢν σὺν τῷ Πατρί, τὸ δὲ γ΄ Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς Νηπιάζει δι’ ἐμὲ ψάλλεται ἐκ β΄, εἶτα Αἴτησις, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἑορτῆς Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός σου, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἑορτῆς τὸ τῆς Λειτουργίας· τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ καὶ ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἀνοιγέσθω ἡ πύλη, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ Στίχου Ὑπεραγία Θεοτόκε, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, καὶ ψάλλεται τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον καὶ ψάλλονται τὰ Μεγαλυνάρια Ἀκατάληπτόν ἐστι, μετὰ τῶν Τροπαρίων τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδῆς καὶ ἡ Καταβασία Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπὶς . . . Ἐν νόμῳ, σκιᾷ, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄ (τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω καὶ τῆς Τυρινῆς Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄), Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν Ὁ ἐν χερσὶ πρεσβυτικαῖς, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

13.	Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα ὡς ἐν § 3. Εἰς τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ Δικαίου Συμεὼν βασταχθείς, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐγνώρισε Κύριος· Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπὶς . . . Ἐν νόμῳ σκιᾷ, Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. {Ἴδε ἄνωθεν §6.}

Κυριακὴ μετὰ τὴν ἑορτὴν ἐντὸς Τριῳδίου.

*(Printed Page 376)*

=== LEAF p392 ===
[English Facing Translation: Feast of the Meeting of our Lord; Situation II Concl. (§ 11 concl. – § 13); Sunday After the Feast in Triodion (p. 377)]

377

Stichira, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, that of the Feast twice, and Dismissal.
12.	On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Liti of the Feast, Glory of the Triodion (when there is one), Now and ever of the Feast, and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos, 2 Kathismata of the Resurrection and the Feast's "The choir of angels," again 2 Resurrection Kathismata and the Feast's "He who is with the Father," the Kathisma of the 3rd Stasis [Stichologia] of the Feast "He is an infant" is sung twice, then the Petition, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon of the Feast "I will remember your name." Then "Let everything that has breath" and the Liturgy Gospel of the Feast; the "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ," Psalm 50 (read), Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," Now and ever the same, the Verse "Have mercy upon me," and the Idiomelon "Let the gate of heaven be opened," the Canons of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Feast with the Stichos "Most Holy Theotokos." After the 3rd Ode the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the Kathisma of the Triodion and of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, and the Minologion of the Feast and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the Megalynaria "It is inconceivable" with the Hymns of the 9th Ode and the Katavasia "O Theotokos, the Hope . . . In the shadow." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira, and 4 of the Feast (on the Sunday of Meatfare and Cheesefare: 3 of the Resurrection, 2 of the Triodion and 3 of the Feast), Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "In the elderly hands," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
13.	In the Liturgy, the Antiphons as in Paragraph 3. In the 2nd Antiphon: "O Son of God, who were carried in the arms of Symeon the Just." The Entrance Hymn "The Lord has made known his victory"; he has revealed his vindication in the sight of the nations. O Son of God who is risen from the dead, save us who sing to You, Alleluia!" The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast and the Kontakion "By Your birth You sanctified a virgin womb." The Apostolos of the Feast and the Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "O Theotokos, the Hope . . . In the shadow," Communion Hymn "I will receive the cup of salvation," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal {see above Paragraph 6}.
Sunday after the Feast within the Triodion.

*(Printed Page 377)*

=== LEAF p393 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday After Feast in Triodion (§ 14 – § 15); Apodosis on Sunday in Triodion (§ 16 incipit) (p. 378)]

378

14.	Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα, Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ μεθέορτα γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν μεθέορτον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

15.	Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμός, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν.* Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· Κανόνες, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα· αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον, τοῦ Τριῳδίου, καὶ τὸ μεθέορτον Ἀτρέπτως καθ’ ὑπόστασιν. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα ε΄ καὶ τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία, ἐν ᾗ ψάλλονται τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. {Ἴδε ἄνωθεν §6.}

Ἀπόδοσις τῆς Ἑορτῆς ἐν Κυριακῇ μετὰ Τριῳδίου.

16.	Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου γ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς δὶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 378)*

=== LEAF p394 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday After Feast in Triodion (§ 14 – § 15); Apodosis on Sunday in Triodion (§ 16 incipit) (p. 379)]

379

14.	In Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Post-feast, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever of the Post-feast. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast once, and Dismissal.
15.	On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Apolytikion of the Feast, the Exapsalmos and the Triadic "It is meet."* At "God is the Lord": the Resurrection Apolytikion twice and the Feast's once, the Psalter and the Amomos. The Kathismata of the Resurrection and one of the Feast's in place of each of the Theotokia, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon; the Canons of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the Kathisma of the Triodion and of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, and the Minologion and of the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the entire order of the Matins Gospel of the Triodion; then "More honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, the Triodion, and the Post-feast "Unchangeable according to hypostasis" (see February 3). At the Praises: 5 Resurrection Stichira, and 3 of the Triodion, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever, "Most blessed," Great Doxology and "Today salvation" and immediately the Liturgy, in which are sung the Typika and the Beatitudes 4 of the Mode and 4 hymns of the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Triodion. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Church and the Kontakion "By Your birth You sanctified a virgin womb." The Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Praise [the Lord]," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal. {See above, Paragraph 6.}

Leave-taking of the Post-feast on a Sunday within the Triodion.

16.	In Vespers on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Feast, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever of the Feast. Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever of the Feast. The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Feast twice,

*(Printed Page 379)*

=== LEAF p395 ===
[Original Greek Text: Apodosis on Sunday in Triodion (§ 17 – § 18); Situation III: Saturday of Souls Concurrence (§ 19); Apodosis Cases Incipit (p. 380)]

380

17.	Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, τὸ τῆς Λιτῆς τοῦ Τριῳδίου Δόξα Ἰδιόμελον (ἐὰν ὑπάρχῃ), εἶτα τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου, τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος τοῦ Τριῳδίου, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς· αἱ καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ ἐν ταῖς Κυριακαῖς τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα τὰ Μεγαλυνάρια Ἀκατάληπτόν ἐστιν ὡς ἐν § 2· Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Τριῳδίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τοῦ Τριῳδίου β΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς γ΄. Δόξα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Καὶ νῦν τῆς ἑορτῆς [Ὁ χερσὶ πρεσβυτικαῖς]. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.

18.	Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς. (Ἰδὲ ἄνωθεν §3) Εἰς τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ Δικαίου Συμεών, τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν Ἐγνώρισε Κύριος. Σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ὁ μήτραν παρθενικήν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως, Θεοτόκε ἡ ἐλπίς . . . [Ἐν νόμῳ σκιᾷ], Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον σωτηρίου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. {Ἰδὲ ἄνωθεν §6.}

[Γ΄]

19.	Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῷ Σαββάτῳ τῶν Ψυχῶν, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Ψυχῶν μετατίθεται καὶ προψάλλεται τῷ πρὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Ἀσώτου Σαββάτῳ· ἡ δὲ Ἀκολουθία τῆς ἑορτῆς ψάλλεται ἀμεταθέτως καὶ ἀπαραλλάκτως ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν § 1, 2, 3. Αὕτη ἦν καὶ ἡ διάταξις τῶν παλαιῶν Τυπικῶν, ὡς καὶ ἡ γνώμη τῶν ἀοιδίμων Πατριαρχῶν Κωνσταντίου τοῦ Βυζαντίου καὶ Γρηγορίου τοῦ ς΄.

Διάφοροι περιπτώσεις τῆς Ἀποδόσεως τῆς ἑορτῆς,

*(Printed Page 380)*

=== LEAF p396 ===
[English Facing Translation: Apodosis on Sunday in Triodion (§ 17 – § 18); Situation III: Saturday of Souls Concurrence (§ 19); Apodosis Cases Incipit (p. 381)]

381

and Dismissal.
17.	On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and Glory of the Liti of the Triodion (when there is one), and the Triadic "It is meet"; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Feast's in place of each of the Theotokia, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Triodion and of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the Kathisma of the Triodion and that of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion, and the Minologion and the Postscript of the Sunday. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the entire order of the Matins Gospel as prescribed in the Triodion; then the Megalynaria "It is inconceivable," as outlined in Paragraph 2, Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Triodion, and of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira, 2 of the Triodion and 3 of the Feast, Glory of the Triodion, Now and ever of the Feast {"In elderly hands," Great Doxology and "Today salvation."
18.	In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast {see above Paragraph 3}. In the 2nd Antiphon: "O Son of God who was carried in the arms of Symeon the Just." The Entrance Hymn "The Lord has made known his victory; he has revealed his vindication in the sight of the nations. O Son of God who is risen from the dead, save us who sing to You, Alleluia!" The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, and the Kontakion "By Your birth You sanctified a virgin womb." The Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "O Theotokos, the Hope [... In the shadow"], Communion Hymn "I will receive the cup of salvation," "We have seen the [true] Light" and Dismissal. {See above Paragraph 6.}

[SITUATION THREE]

19.	If the Feast occurs on the Saturday of the Souls, the Service of the Saturday of the Souls is chanted on the previous Saturday, i.e. the Saturday before the Sunday of the Prodigal Son; the Service of the Feast, on the other hand, is chanted without being moved to another day and without any alteration as prescribed in Paragraphs 1, 2, and 3. This is the order as prescribed in the ancient Typika, according also to the opinion of the revered Patriarchs Constantios the Byzantine and Gregory the Sixth.
Various situations of the Leave-taking of the Feast, when it

*(Printed Page 381)*

=== LEAF p397 ===
[Original Greek Text: Apodosis Cases α΄–ε΄; Cheesefare Sunday Evening Vespers (§ 20 incipit) (p. 382)]

382

ὅταν συμπέσῃ ἐν μιᾷ τῶν ἡμερῶν ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου μέχρι τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Τυρινῆς.

α΄.	Ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τοῦ Τελώνου καὶ Φαρισαίου μέχρι τῆς Παρασκευῆς τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος, ἐν οἵᾳ ἡμέρᾳ ἤθελε τύχει ἡ ἑορτή, ἡ Ἀπόδοσις γίνεται τῇ ὀγδόῃ ἡμέρᾳ, ἤτοι τῇ Θ΄ τοῦ μηνός.
β΄.	Ἀπὸ τοῦ Σαββάτου τῆς τοῦ Ἀσώτου παραμονῆς μέχρι τῆς Τρίτης τῆς ἑβδομάδος τῆς Ἀπόκρεω, ἐν οἵᾳ ἡμέρᾳ ἤθελε τύχει ἡ ἑορτή, ἡ Ἀπόδοσις γίνεται τῇ πρὸ τοῦ Σαββάτου τῶν Ψυχῶν Παρασκευῇ, διότι ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Ψυχῶν οὐ μετατίθεται διὰ τὴν Ἀπόδοσιν τῆς ἑορτῆς, ἀλλὰ ψάλλεται ἀμεταθέτως ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ τῶν Ψυχῶν Σαββάτῳ κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ διάταξιν.
γ΄.	Ἀπὸ τῆς Τετάρτης τῆς ἑβδομάδος τῆς Ἀπόκρεω μέχρι τοῦ Σαββάτου τῶν Ψυχῶν, ἐν οἵᾳ ἡμέρᾳ ἤθελε τύχει ἡ ἑορτή, ἡ Ἀπόδοσις γίνεται τῇ Τρίτῃ τῆς Τυρινῆς.
δ΄.	Ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Ἀπόκρεω, μέχρι τῆς τρίτης τῆς Τυρινῆς, ἐν οἵᾳ ἡμέρᾳ ἤθελε τύχει ἡ ἑορτή, ἡ Ἀπόδοσις γίνεται τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος.
ε΄.	Ἀπὸ τῆς τετάρτης τῆς Τυρινῆς, μέχρι τοῦ Σαββάτου, ἐν οἵᾳ ἡμέρᾳ ἤθελε τύχει ἡ ἑορτή, ἡ Ἀπόδοσις γίνεται τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Τυρινῆς καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία ὡς διετυπώθη ἐν § 16, 17, 18. Συμπιπτούσης δὲ τῆς ἑορτῆς τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Τυρινῆς, ὅτε καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία κατὰ τὴν § 11, 12, 13 διάταξιν, ἡ Ἀπόδοσις ψάλλεται τῇ αὐτῇ Κυριακῇ ἑσπέρας ὡς ἐφεξῆς.
20.	Τὸ ἑσπέρας τῆς Κυριακῆς τῆς Τυρινῆς, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τῶν Αἴνων τῆς ἑορτῆς Στιχηρὰ καὶ γ΄ τοῦ Θεοδόχου Συμεὼν Δίκαιος καὶ τέλειος, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνοιγέσθω ἡ Πύλη. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Μέγα Προκείμενον Μὴ ἀποστρέψῃς ἐκ τρίτου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἔλαμψεν ἡ χάρις σου δίς, καὶ τὸ Μαρτυρικόν· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ τοῖς Χερουβὶμ ἐποχούμενος, Νῦν ἀπολύεις, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου καὶ ἡ Ἀπόλυσις οὕτω· Δόξα σοι ὁ Θεός, ἡ ἐλπὶς ἡμῶν, δόξα σοι, ὁ ἐν ἀγκάλαις τοῦ δικαίου Σημεὼν βασταχθῆναι καταδεξάμενος διὰ τὴν ἡμῶν σωτηρίαν Χριστὸς ὁ ἀληθινὸς Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Παναχράντου αὐτοῦ Μητρός, τῶν ἁγίων, ἐνδόξων καὶ πανευφήμων Ἀποστόλων καὶ πάντων τῶν Ἁγίων, ἐλεήσαι

*(Printed Page 382)*

=== LEAF p398 ===
[English Facing Translation: Apodosis Cases 1]–5]; Cheesefare Sunday Evening Vespers (§ 20 incipit) (p. 383)]

383

occurs on one of the days between the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee and the Sunday of Cheesefare.

1]	From the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee until the Friday of that week, no matter on which day the Feast occurs, the Leave-taking is observed on the eighth day, that is, the 9th of the month.
2]	From the Saturday of the eve of the Prodigal Son until the Tuesday of Meatfare Week, no matter on which day the Feast occurs, the Leave-taking is observed on the Friday before the Saturday of the Souls, because the Service of the Souls is not moved for the sake of the Leave-taking of the Feast, but is sung on that Saturday of the Souls, according to the order of the Triodion.
3]	From Wednesday of Meatfare Week until the Saturday of the Souls, no matter on which day the Feast occurs, the Leave-taking is observed on the Tuesday of Cheesefare Week.
4]	From the Sunday of Meatfare until Tuesday of Cheesefare Week, no matter on when the Feast occurs, the Leave-taking is observed on the Friday of that week.
5]	From the Wednesday of Cheesefare until Saturday of Cheesefare, no matter on which day the Feast occurs, the Leave-taking is observed on the Sunday of Cheesefare and the Service is sung as prescribed in Paragraphs 16, 17 and 18. If the Feast occurs on the Sunday of Cheesefare, then the Service is sung according to the order of Paragraphs 11, 12, & 13, and the Leave-taking is sung that Sunday evening according to the following order:
20.	On the evening of the Sunday of Cheesefare, after the Introductory Psalm, at "Lord, I have cried," the 3 Stichira of the Praises of the Feast and three of the God-Receiver Symeon "Just and perfect," Glory, Now and ever, "Let the gate of heaven be opened." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light" and the Great Prokimenon "Do not turn" (three times.) At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon "Your grace shone forth" and the Hymn to the Martyrs; Glory, Now and ever, "He who is borne on high by the Cherubim." Then "Now let" and the Trisagion. The Apolytikion three times and the Dismissal thus: "Glory to You, our God, glory to You. May He who for our salvation was carried in the arms of Symeon the Just, Christ our true God, who is the gracious Lover of Mankind, save us through the intercessions of His all-pure Mother, of the glorious Apostles worthy of all praise, and of all the Saints, for He is truly gracious and the Lover of Mankind," without "Through the prayers"; but immediately the Choirs sing "Theotokos

*(Printed Page 383)*

=== LEAF p399 ===
[Original Greek Text: Cheesefare Sunday Evening Vespers (§ 20 concl.); Situation IV: Clean Monday Concurrence (§§ 21 – 22) (p. 384)]

384

καὶ σώσαι ἡμᾶς ὡς ἀγαθὸς καὶ φιλάνθρωπος, ἄνευ τοῦ Δι’ εὐχῶν, ἀλλ’ εὐθὺς οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι τὸ Θεοτόκε Παρθένε κτλ. τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄, Ὁ ὢν εὐλογητός, τὸ Ἐπουράνιε Βασιλεῦ, καὶ μετὰ τὰς Μετανοίας, ὁ Ἱερεὺς ἄνευ ἑτέρας Ἀπολύσεως τὸ Εὐξώμεθα ὑπὲρ εἰρήνης τοῦ κόσμου, εἶτα ψάλλουσιν οἱ Χοροὶ τὸ Πάντων προστατεύεις ἵνα οὕτω τὴν ἐξ ἔθους ἱεροῦ ἀρχαίου ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ προεισοδίου τούτου Ἑσπερινοῦ τῆς τεσσαρακονθημέρου νηστείας οἱ εὐσεβεῖς Χριστιανοὶ λάβωσι τὴν συγχώρησιν· καὶ ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν τῇ περιστάσει ταύτῃ.

Δ΄.

21.	Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Δευτέρᾳ τῆς Α΄ ἑβδομάδος τῶν Νηστειῶν, τῇ Κυριακῇ τῆς Τυρινῆς ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἐγκρατείᾳ τὴν σάρκα καὶ τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Λέγε Συμεών, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνοιγέσθω ἡ Πύλη, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, το Προκείμενον Ἰδοὺ δὴ εὐλογεῖτε τὸν Κύριον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον (τοῦ Τριῳδίου) Ἔλαμψεν ἡ χάρις σου καὶ τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἀπόστιχα Ἰδιόμελα Κατακόσμησον τὸν Νυμφῶνά σου καὶ Τὸν ἐκλάμψαντα πρὸ αἰώνων, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ τοῖς Χερουβὶμ ἐποχούμενος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
22.	Τῇ Δευτέρᾳ, εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ Στιχολογίαν τοῦ Τριῳδίου Τῆς νηστείας τῇ θείᾳ ἀπαρχῇ, καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Χορὸς ἀγγελικός, εἰς τὴν β΄ Στιχολογίαν Τὴν πάνσεπτον ἐγκράτειαν, καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὁ ὢν σὺν τῷ Πατρί, εἰς δὲ τὴν γ΄ Στιχολογίαν, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἐκ δευτέρου· οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Μνησθήσομαι τοῦ ὀνόματός σου, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Ὄρθρου· ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλεησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Ἀνοιγέσθω ἡ πύλη, ὁ Κανὼν εἰς ἕξ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα τῆς ἑορτῆς ἅπαξ, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι Χέρσον ἀβυσσοτόκον, εἶτα τὰ Μεγαλυνάρια Ἀκατάληπτόν ἐστι, μετὰ τῶν τῆς Θ΄ Ὠδῆς Τροπαρίων ὡς διετυπώθησαν ἐν § 2· τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον Ἐν...

*(Printed Page 384)*

=== LEAF p400 ===
[English Facing Translation: Cheesefare Sunday Evening Vespers (§ 20 concl.); Situation IV: Clean Monday Concurrence (§§ 21 – 22) (p. 385)]

385

Virgin" etc., "Lord, have mercy" (40 times), "The One who is Blessed," the "Heavenly King," and after the Prostrations, the Priest, without any other Dismissal prayers, intones: "Let us pray for the peace of the world." Then the Choirs sing "You protect all," so that, according to a revered and ancient custom, at the end of this Vesper Service sung in Pre-feast for the forty-day fast, the faithful may receive forgiveness. The Leave-taking of the Feast is observed in this situation.

SITUATION FOUR

21.	If the Feast occurs on a Monday of the First Week of Great Lent, in Vespers on Sunday of Cheesefare evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried," we sing 3 Stichira of the Triodion "The flesh by abstinence," and 3 of the Feast "Symeon, tell us," Glory, Now and ever, "Let the gate of heaven be opened." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon "Behold now, bless the Lord," and the Readings of the Feast. At the Aposticha: the Idiomelon "Your grace has shone forth" {from the Triodion} and the two Stichira of the Feast "Adorn your bridal chamber," and "Him who shone before the centuries" Glory, Now and ever, "He who is borne on high by the Cherubim," the Apolytikion of the Feast three times, and Dismissal.
22.	On Monday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti of the Feast, then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord": the Apolytikion three times, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata of the first Stasis [Stichologia] of the Triodion "The sacred beginning of the Fast" and of the Feast "The choir of angels"; at the second Stasis [Stichologia] "the all-pure continence" and the Feast's "He who is with the Father"; at the third Stasis [Stichologia] that of the Feast twice; the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon "I will remember Your name" (Psalm 44:17). Then "Let all breath" and the Gospel of Matins; Psalm 50 read, Glory, "Through the intercessions of the Theotokos," Now and ever the same, the Verse "Have mercy upon me," and the Idiomelon "Let the gate of heaven"; the Canon with six hymns. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Feast once; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie "The sun once shone" and the following Megalynaria "It is inconceivable" with the hymns of the 9th Ode as printed in Paragraph 2; Exapostilarion "In spirit at the temple" three times. At the Praises: the Prosomia "Fulfilling the written Law," Glory, Now and ever of the Feast "In elderly hands," Great

*(Printed Page 385)*
