=== LEAF p181 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 12: Apodosis Concl. / September 13: Consecration of the Temple of the Holy Sepulchre & Forefeast of the Cross (p. 166)]

166

Ἄμωμος. Καθίσματα εἰς τὴν α΄ καὶ β΄ Στιχολογίαν ἀνὰ δύο Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς ἑορτῆς, εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, καὶ οἱ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Ἡ Παρθένος Μαριὰμ ἅπαξ, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, καὶ μετ’ αὐτὴν ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα Αὕτη ἡμέρα Κυρίου, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη· Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, Σήμερον σωτηρία, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία μετὰ τῶν Ἀντιφώνων ὡς ἐν τῇ ἰδίᾳ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἀλλότριον τῶν μητέρων· Κοινωνικὸν Ποτήριον σωτηρίου, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι, ὅταν τύχῃ ἡ Ἀπόδοσις ἐν Σαββάτῳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τοῦ Σαββάτου πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως.

Τῇ ΙΓ΄. Μνήμη τῶν Ἐγκαινίων [τοῦ Ναοῦ τῆς Ἀναστάσεως εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα] καὶ Προεόρτια [τῆς Ὑψώσεως] τοῦ Τιμίου Σταυροῦ, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Μάρτυρος Κορνηλίου.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἐγκαινίων ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ, πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται μετὰ τῶν Προεορτίων τοῦ Σταυροῦ ὥς ἐστι διατεταγμένη ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ.
2.    Ἄν τύχωσι τὰ Ἐγκαίνια ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων γ΄ καὶ Προεόρτια τοῦ Σταυροῦ γ΄ τὰ ἐν τῷ μικρῷ Ἑσπερινῷ Ὑψουμένου σου Δέσποτα· Δόξα Τὴν μνήμην τῶν Ἐγκαινίων· Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν, τὸ Προκείμενον, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῶν Ἐγκαινίων. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα καὶ νῦν Σύ μου σκέπη κραταιὰ, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, τὸ Προεόρτιον Τὸν ζωοποιὸν Σταυρὸν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὡς τοῦ ἄνω στερεώματος καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ

*(Printed Page 166)*

=== LEAF p182 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 12: Apodosis Concl. / September 13: Consecration of the Temple of the Holy Sepulchre & Forefeast of the Cross (p. 167)]

167

Feast in place of the Theotokia, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Feast. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma “The Virgin Mary” once; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints of the day. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then we sing “More honorable,” and after that the 9th Ode of the Feast is sung. The Resurrection Exapostilarion and that of the Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and the 4 Stichira of the Feast, Glory, “This is the day of the Lord,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.” Then follows the Liturgy, with the Antiphons as on the day of the Feast, Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before the Elevation. At “Especially,” “Virginity is alien to motherhood,” Communion Hymn “I will receive the cup of salvation,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal

Note that, when the Leave-taking occurs on Saturday, the Apostolos and Gospel of the Saturday before the Elevation are recited.

The 13th. Commemoration of the Consecration [of the Church of the Resurrection in Jerusalem] and Pre-feast [of the Elevation] of the Holy Cross, and of the Holy Martyr Cornelius.

1.    If the commemoration of the Consecration occurs on any day other than Sunday, the Service is chanted together with the hymns of the Pre-feast of the Cross as prescribed in the Mineon.
2.    If the Consecration occurs on Sunday, Saturday in Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Resurrection Stichira , 3 of the Consecration, and 3 of the Pre-feast of the Cross, from the Small Vespers “Lifted high upon the Cross”; Glory, “The commemoration of the Consecration”; Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings of the Consecration. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “You my powerful protection”; the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Consecration, that of the Pre-feast “The Life-creating Cross,” and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “As You had shown from on high” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Amomos, the Resurrection Kathismata and

*(Printed Page 167)*

=== LEAF p183 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 13: Consecration Concl. / September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross (p. 168)]

168

ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ τὰ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων ἀντὶ Θεοτοκίων· τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ τοῦ Σταυροῦ καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῶν Ἐγκαινίων Ἐν πίστει τὰ Ἐγκαίνια ἅπαξ, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος, τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων Μέσον τῆς γῆς ὁ Κύριος καὶ Μετ’ εὐφροσύνης κράξωμεν. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἐγκαινίων δ΄, Σήμερον ὁ ἔνθεος, οἱ Στίχοι ὁ α΄ Κύριε ἠγάπησα εὐπρέπειαν οἴκου σου καὶ τόπον σκηνώματος δόξης σου· ὁ β΄ Σοὶ πρέπει ὕμνος ὁ Θεὸς ἐν Σιών, καὶ σοὶ ἀποδοθήσεται εὐχὴ ἐν Ἱερουσαλήμ· Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον Σωτηρία.

4.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον Τὸν ζωοποιὸν Σταυρὸν τῆς σῆς ἀγαθότητος, τῶν Ἐγκαινίων Ὡς τοῦ ἄνω στερεώματος, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Οὐρανὸς πολύφωτος ἡ Ἐκκλησία, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Ὅταν δὲ συμπέσῃ ἡ μνήμη τῶν Ἐγκαινίων ἐν Σαββάτῳ, Ἀπόστολος λέγεται τοῦ Σαββάτου πρὸ τῆς Ὑψώσεως, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῶν Ἐγκαινίων, Κοινωνικὸν Κύριε ἠγάπησα εὐπρέπειαν Οἴκου σου.

Τῇ ΙΔ΄. Ἡ παγκόσμιος Ὕψωσις τοῦ τιμίου καὶ ζωοποιοῦ Σταυροῦ.

(Σημείωσις. Ἰστέον ὅτι, κατὰ τὴν μεγάλην ταύτην ἡμέραν τῆς Ὑψώσεως ἀνεπαύσατο ἐν Κυρίῳ ὁ ἐν ἁγίοις πατὴρ ἡμῶν Ἰωάννης ὁ Χρυσόστομος, οὐ ψάλλεται δὲ ἡ Ἀκολουθία αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς Ὑψώσεως, μετατεθείσης τῆς μνήμης αὐτοῦ τῇ ιγ τοῦ Νοεμβρίου ἵνα μείνωσι τὰ τῆς Ἀκολουθίας αὐτοῦ ἀνελλιπῆ καὶ ἀμείωτα).

5.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Ὕψωσις ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, οὐδὲν τῶν Ἀναστασίμων ψάλλομεν, ἀλλ’ ἅπαντα τὰ τῆς ἑορτῆς.
    Ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια Σταυρὸς ἀνυψούμενος

*(Printed Page 168)*

=== LEAF p184 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 13: Consecration Concl. / September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross (p. 169)]

169

those of the Consecration in place of the Theotokia; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the Cross and of the Consecration. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Consecration “In faith the Consecration” once; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross,” and the entire order of the Matins Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” The Resurrection Exapostilarion and those of the Consecration: “In the midst of the earth, the Lord” and “With gladness let us cry.” At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Consecration “Today the God-inspired” with the following 2 Verses: #1 “Lord, I have loved the comeliness of Your house, and the place where Your glory dwells.” #2 “Praise is awaiting You, O God, in Zion; and to You the vow shall be paid.” Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
4.    In the Liturgy, the Typika, and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Consecration. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Pre-feast “The Life-creating Cross of your goodness,” that of the Consecration “As You had shown from on high,” that of Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “A fully illumined heaven, the Church”; Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday before the Elevation. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
    When the commemoration of the Consecration occurs on a Saturday, the Apostolos of the Saturday before the Elevation and the Gospel of the Consecration are read, and the Communion Hymn “Lord, I have loved the comeliness of Your house” is chanted.

The 14th. The Universal Elevation of the Precious and Life-creating Cross.

(Note: It must be borne in mind that, on this great day of the Elevation, our holy Father John Chrysostom rested in the Lord. His service, however, is not chanted on the day of the Elevation; rather, his commemoration is transferred to November 13, so that the hymns of his service may remain complete and undiminished.)

5.    If the Feast of the Elevation occurs on a Sunday, we sing none of the Resurrection hymns, but only those of the Feast.
    In Great Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried,” we sing the 3 Prosomia “The Cross is raised on

*(Printed Page 169)*

=== LEAF p185 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross — Vespers & Matins Procession (p. 170)]

170

εἰς στ΄. Δόξα Καὶ νῦν, Δεῦτε ἅπαντα τὰ ἔθνη, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ Προσόμοια Χαίροις ὁ ζωηφόρος Σταυρός· οἱ Στίχοι Ὑψοῦτε Κύριον τὸν θεὸν ἡμῶν καὶ προσκυνεῖτε τῷ ὑποποδίῳ τῶν ποδῶν αὐτοῦ· ἕτερος, Ὁ δὲ θεὸς βασιλεὺς ἡμῶν πρὸ αἰώνων εἰργάσατο σωτηρίαν ἐν μέσῳ τῆς γῆς· Δόξα. Καὶ νῦν, Ὅνπερ πάλαι Μωϋσῆς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σῶσον, Κύριε, τὸν λαόν σου ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
6.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ἡ Λιτή, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειρὰν ἐκ δευτέρου, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον, Εἴδοσαν πάντα τὰ πέρατα τῆς γῆς τὸ σωτήριον τοῦ θεοῦ ἡμῶν· Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον, τὸ Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ (ὅπερ λέγεται εἰς οἱανδήποτε ἡμέραν τύχῃ ἡ Ὕψωσις τοῦ Σταυροῦ) καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα, Σύ μου σκέπη κραταιὰ ὑπάρχεις. Καὶ νῦν, τὸ αὐτό. Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Σταυρὲ τοῦ Χριστοῦ, ὁ Κανὼν εἰς ἕξ ἄνευ Στίχων, ἐκτὸς τοῦ Δόξα. Καὶ νῦν ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς, τὸ Κάθισμα ἅπαξ, ἀφ’ ς΄, τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Σταυρὸν χαράξας, εἶτα ψάλλονται τῆς Θ΄ καὶ αἱ δύο Ὠδαί, καὶ αἱ δύο Καταβασίαι Μυστικὸς εἶ Θεοτόκε, καὶ Ὁ διὰ βρώσεως τοῦ ξύλου, τὸ α΄ Ἐξαποστειλάριον δὶς καὶ τὸ β΄ ἅπαξ. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ Προσόμοια Ὢ τοῦ παραδόξου θαύματος εἰς δ΄ (εἰς τὸ Αἰνεῖτε ὁ Πατριάρχης ἢ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς οὐ προσκυνεῖ ὡς συνήθως, διότι μετ’ ὀλίγον μέλλει προσκυνῆσαι τὸν τίμιον Σταυρόν), Δόξα. Καὶ νῦν Σήμερον προέρχεται, Δοξολογία μεγάλη εἰς ἦχον δ΄ εἰς δὲ τὸ Ἀσματικὸν Ἅγιος ὁ θεός, γίνεται ἡ Εἴσοδος τοῦ τιμίου Σταυροῦ κατὰ τὴν ἑξῆς διάταξιν. Ὁ ἱερουργῶν ἱερεὺς στὰς ἐνώπιον τῆς Ἁγίας Τραπέζης καὶ θυμιάσας τὸν τίμιον Σταυρὸν κείμενον ἐπὶ ταύτης ἐν δίσκῳ μετὰ κλάδων βασιλικοῦ καὶ τριῶν κηρίων, αἴρει τὸν δίσκον καὶ τίθησιν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς· στραφεὶς δὲ περὶ τὴν Ἁγίαν Τράπεζαν ἐκ δεξιῶν πρὸς τὰ ἀριστερά, τῶν Ἱεροδιακόνων θυμιώντων καὶ τῶν λαμπάδων, τῶν ἑξαπτερύγων, καὶ τῶν Ψαλτῶν προπορευομένων καὶ μετὰ τούτους τοῦ Πριμικηρίου φέροντος τὸ Διδάμβουλον, τῶν Ψαλτῶν δὲ ψαλλόντων τὸ Ἅγιος ὁ θεός, φέρει τὸν Σταυρὸν ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τοῦ Ναοῦ, ἔνθα ἵσταται τὸ Τετραπόδιον ηὐτρεπισμένον καὶ κύκλῳ αὐτοῦ περιελθὼν τρὶς ἵσταται, καὶ βλέπων πρὸς Ἀνατολάς, κρατῶν δὲ εἰς χεῖρας τὸν δίσκον ἐκφωνεῖ Σοφία, ὀρθοί, καὶ τίθησιν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τοῦ τετραποδίου· εἶτα θυμιάζων κύκλῳ αὐτοῦ σταυροειδῶς,

*(Printed Page 170)*

=== LEAF p186 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross — Vespers & Matins Procession (p. 171)]

171

high,” in six. Glory, Now and ever, “Come, all you nations.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon, and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Prosomia “Hail! Life-creating Cross,” with the Verse “Extol the Lord our God; worship at His footstool. For He is holy!” or another “Yet God, my King, is from old, working salvation in the earth.” Glory, Now and ever, “Whom Moses again.” The Apolytikion “O Lord, save Your people” three times, and Dismissal.
6.    In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion [of the Feast] three times, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order twice each, the Anavathmi of the first Antiphon of Mode IV, and the Prokimenon “All the ends of the earth have seen the victory of our God.” Then “Let everything that has breath” and the [Morning] Gospel; then “We have seen the Resurrection of Christ” (which is said on whatever day of the week the Feast of the Elevation may fall) and Psalm 50 (read). Glory, “You are my powerful protection,” Now and ever, the same. The Verse “Have mercy upon me,” and the Idiomelon “O Cross of Christ.” The Canon in six without Verses, except for Glory. Now and ever. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma once; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie “Moses, having etched the sign of the Cross; then are sung both Odes of the 9th Ode and the two Katavasie “O Theotokos, you are a mystical paradise” and “Through the eating of the tree.” The first Exapostilarion twice and the second once. At the Praises: the Prosomia “O marvellous wonder!” in four (at “Praise,” the Patriarch or the Arch-priest does not venerate as usual, because in a short while he will venerate the Holy Cross), Glory, Now and ever, “Today goes forth,” Great Doxology in Mode IV. At the Asmatikon [elaborate] “Holy God” [at the end of the Doxology], the Entrance [Procession] of the Holy Cross takes place in the following order: The officiating Priest stands before the Holy Table and censes the Precious Cross, which already lies on it in a tray with sprigs of basil and three candles. Then he raises the tray and, placing it against the top of his forehead, he proceeds around the Holy Table from the right to the left [counter clockwise], while the Deacons cense. The processional candles, the Exapteryga [six-winged fans], and the Chanters precede the Cross. After these follows the Primikyrios [Chief Priest] carrying the Didamvulon [two-wicked candle]. While the Chanters sing “Holy God,” the Priest brings the Cross to the center of the Church where a Tetrapod [four-legged table] stands adorned. Having gone around this table three times, the Priest stops and stands in front of it. Facing to the East and holding the tray in his hands,

*(Printed Page 171)*

=== LEAF p187 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross — Fivefold Elevation of the Cross (p. 172)]

172

ψάλλει τὸ Σῶσον Κύριε ἅπαξ, τὸ αὐτὸ καὶ οἱ δύο χοροὶ ἀνὰ μίαν· μετὰ ταῦτα βαλὼν μετανοίας τρεῖς (ἐν οἵᾳ ἡμέρᾳ τύχῃ), καὶ λαβὼν ἀνὰ χεῖρας τὸν Τίμιον Σταυρὸν μετὰ κλάδων βασιλικοῦ καὶ βλέπων πρὸς Ἀνατολάς, ὑψοῖ αὐτὸν καὶ λέγει μεγαλοφώνως. Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κατὰ τὸ μέγα ἔλεός σου, δεόμεθά σου ἐπάκουσον καὶ ἐλέησον, καὶ ἄρχονται οἱ χοροὶ τῆς α΄ ἑκατοντάδος τοῦ Κύριε ἐλέησον, τοῦ Ἱερέως σφραγίζοντος ἐν ταῖς ἐνάρξεσι μετὰ τοῦ τιμίου Σταυροῦ τρίς, καὶ κλίνοντος τὴν κεφαλὴν ἠρέμα, ὅσον σπιθαμὴν ἀπέχειν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς· ἀνίσταται δὲ αὖθις κατὰ μικρὸν ἄχρι τῆς συμπληρώσεως τῆς α΄ ἑκατοντάδος· εἶτα στραφεὶς πρὸς τὰ δεξιὰ καὶ βλέπων πρὸς Βορρᾶν λέγει· Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων χριστιανῶν, καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ἄρχονται τῆς β΄ ἑκατοντάδος, ὁ δὲ Ἱερεὺς ποιεῖ τὴν β΄ ὕψωσιν ὡς προδιεγράφη· εἶθ’ οὕτως στραφεὶς πρὸς Δυσμάς, λέγει· Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν . . . καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ἄρχονται τῆς γ΄ ἑκατοντάδος· πληρουμένης δὲ ταύτης, ὁ Ἱερεὺς στρέφεται πρὸς τὸ Νότιον μέρος καὶ λέγει· Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπέρ τῶν ἐνδημούντων ἁγίων Ἀρχιερέων καὶ τῶν ἀποδημούντων ἐν ταῖς ἐπαρχίαις αὐτῶν, καὶ γίνεται ἡ δ΄ ὕψωσις· καὶ αὖθις ὁ Ἱερεὺς στραφεὶς πρὸς Ἀνατολάς, λέγει· Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ τῶν διακονούντων καὶ διακονησάντων ἐν τῇ ἁγίᾳ ταύτῃ τοῦ Χριστοῦ Μεγάλῃ Ἐκκλησίᾳ καὶ ὑπὲρ πάσης ψυχῆς χριστιανῶν ὀρθοδόξων, ὑγείας τε καὶ σωτηρίας καὶ ἀφέσεως τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν αὐτῶν, καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ἄρχονται τῆς ε΄ ἑκατοντάδος· εἶτα τίθησιν ὁ Ἱερεὺς τὸν τίμιον Σταυρὸν ἐπὶ τοῦ δίσκου, καὶ προσελθὼν ὁ Πατριάρχης (ἢ ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς) καὶ λαβὼν αὐτὸν μετὰ κλάδων βασιλικοῦ, βλέπων πρὸς Ἀνατολάς, ὑψοῖ αὐτὸν ψάλλων τὸ· Ὁ Ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ ἑκουσίως· θεὶς δὲ τὸν Σταυρὸν ἐπὶ τοῦ δίσκου καὶ προσκυνῶν ψάλλει· Τὸν Σταυρόν σου προσκυνοῦμεν Δέσποτα, ἅπαξ τὸ αὐτὸ ψάλλουσι καὶ οἱ Χοροὶ ἀνὰ μίαν· εἶτα ἀσπασάμενος τὸν τίμιον Σταυρὸν εὐλογεῖ τὸν λαὸν καὶ ἀνέρχεται εἰς τὸν θρόνον, τῶν Χορῶν ψαλλόντων τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη. Μετὰ τοῦτο προσέρχονται οἱ Ἀρχιερεῖς ἀνὰ δύο κατὰ τάξιν καὶ προσκυνοῦσι τὸν τίμιον Σταυρόν· προσερχόμενοι δὲ λαμβάνουσι παρὰ τοῦ Πατριάρχου τοὺς κλάδους τοῦ βασιλικοῦ ἀσπαζόμενοι τὴν δεξιὰν αὐτοῦ· ὡσαύτως καὶ πάντες οἱ Ἐκκλησιαστικοὶ Ὀφφικιάλοι· ἐν τῷ μεταξὺ τούτῳ, ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Δεῦτε πιστοί, καὶ τούτου πληρωθέντος, ψάλλεται τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ἄρχεται ἡ Λειτουργία.

*(Printed Page 172)*

=== LEAF p188 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross — Fivefold Elevation of the Cross (p. 173)]

173

he exclaims: “Wisdom, arise.” Then he places the Cross upon the table. Then, censing the Cross circularly in the form of a cross [from each of the four sides of the table], he chants “O Lord, save Your people” once; this hymn is then repeated once by each of the two Choirs. After this, the Priest makes three prostrations (whatever day it may be) and taking the Precious Cross with the sprigs of basil, he faces towards the East, raises it and says in a loud voice “Have mercy upon us, O God, according to Your great mercy; we pray to You, hear and have mercy.” The Choirs begin to sing the first 100 “Lord, have mercy”; the Priest makes the sign of the Cross three times with the Precious Cross, and then slowly bends down so that his head comes quite close to the ground. After this he slowly rises again, as the Choir comes to the end of the first 100 “Lord, have mercy.” Then he stands on the right side of the table and, facing towards the North, he says “Again we pray for all pious and Orthodox Christians.” He then raises the Cross as before, while the Choirs sing the second 100 “Lord, have mercy”; then the Priest performs the 2nd Elevation, as described before. He then stands on the East side of the table and, facing towards the West, he says “Again we pray for our Archbishop (name)”; the Choirs begin to sing the third 100 “Lord, have mercy,” while he raises the Cross as before for the 3rd Elevation. He then goes to the left side of the table and, turning towards the South, he says “Again we pray for the local holy Archpriests and those departed to their eparchies.” The Choirs begin to sing the fourth 100 “Lord, have mercy” as he raises the Cross, and the 4th Elevation is done. Finally he returns to the front of the table and, facing towards the East again, he says “Again we pray for those who serve or have served in this holy Great Church of Christ and for the souls of all Orthodox Christians, for their health and salvation, and the remission of their sins.” The Choirs begin to sing the fifth and final 100 “Lord, have mercy,” while the Cross is elevated for the 5th and last Elevation. Then the Priest places the Precious Cross on the tray, and the Patriarch (or Archpriest) takes the Cross with the sprigs of basil and, facing East, raises it up and chants “Lifted up of Your own will upon the Cross.” Then, he lays the Cross on the tray, and venerating it, chants “We venerate Your Cross, O Master” (once); this is repeated once by each of the two Choirs. Then, after kissing the Precious Cross, he blesses the people and returns to his throne, the Choirs singing “Many years, O Master.” After this the Archpriests come forth two by two in order of rank and venerate the Precious Cross; coming forward, they, as well as all the Ecclesiastical Officials, receive basil sprigs from the Patriarch, kissing his right hand; meanwhile, the 2nd Choir sings the Idiomelon “Come, you faithful.” And when this is completed, the Apolytikion is sung and the Liturgy begins.

*(Printed Page 173)*

=== LEAF p189 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross — Liturgy Antiphons & Non-Hierarchical Order (p. 174)]

174

(Σημ. Ἰστέον ὅτι ἡ τάξις αὕτη τῆς Ὑψώσεως τοῦ Σταυροῦ γίνεται ἐν τῇ Μ. Ἐκκλησίᾳ καὶ ἔνθα ἄν εὑρίσκηται χοροστατῶν Ἀρχιερεύς· ἀπόντος δὲ τοῦ Πατριάρχου ἢ τοῦ Ἀρχιερέως, μόνος ὁ Ἱερεὺς ποιεῖ τὴν Ὕψωσιν, ὡς καὶ ἐν ταῖς λοιπαῖς Ἱεραῖς Ἐκκλησίαις· ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὴν δ΄ ἑκατοντάδα ὁ Ἱερεὺς λέγει· Ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ ἐλέους, ζωῆς, εἰρήνης, ὑγείας, σωτηρίας, συγχωρήσεως καὶ ἀφέσεως τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν τῶν δούλων τοῦ Θεοῦ, τῶν Ἐπιτρόπων, ἐνοριτῶν καὶ συνδρομητῶν τῆς ἁγίας Ἐκκλησίας ταύτης σὺν γυναιξὶ καὶ τέκνοις αὐτῶν· κατὰ δὲ τὴν ε΄ ἑκατοντάδα λέγει, ἔτι δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ πάσης ψυχῆς Χριστιανῶν Ὀρθοδόξων, ὑγείας τε καὶ σωτηρίας καὶ ἀφέσεως τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν αὐτῶν).

7.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα.

Ἀντίφωνον Α΄ Ἦχος β΄.
Ὁ θεός, ὁ θεός μου πρόσχες μοι, ἵνα τί ἐγκατέλιπές με;
Μακρὰν ἀπὸ τῆς σωτηρίας μου οἱ λόγοι τῶν παραπτωμάτων μου.
Ὁ θεός μου κεκράξομαι ἡμέρας καὶ οὐκ εἰσακούσῃ·
Σὺ δὲ ἐν Ἁγίῳ κατοικεῖς, ὁ ἔπαινος τοῦ Ἰσραήλ.
Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου κτλ.

Ἀντίφωνον Β΄ Ἦχος β΄.
Ἵνα τί ὁ θεὸς ἀπώσω εἰς τέλος;
Μνήσθητι τῆς συναγωγῆς σου, ἧς ἐκτήσω ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς.
Ὄρος Σιὼν τοῦτο, ὃ κατεσκήνωσας ἐν αὐτῷ.
Ὁ δὲ θεὸς Βασιλεὺς ἡμῶν, πρὸ αἰώνων εἰργάσατο σωτηρίαν ἐν μέσῳ τῆς γῆς.
Σῶσον ἡμᾶς, Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ σαρκὶ σταυρωθείς κτλ. (οἵα ἄν ἡμέρα τύχῃ).

[Ἀντίφωνον Γ΄ Ἦχος α΄.]*
Ὁ Κύριος ἐβασίλευσεν, ὀργιζέσθωσαν λαοί.
Κύριος ἐν Σιὼν μέγας καὶ ὑψηλός ἐστιν ἐπὶ πάντας τοὺς λαούς.
Ἐξομολογησάσθωσαν τῷ ὀνόματί σου τῷ μεγάλῳ, ὅτι φοβερὸν καὶ ἅγιόν ἐστιν.
Σῶσον Κύριε τὸν λαὸν σου κτλ.

* [Αὕτη ἡ γραμμή, ἡ ὁποία ὑποδεικνύει τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς τοῦ ἀντιφώνου καὶ τοῦ ἤχου, ἔχει παραλειφθεῖ εἰς τὸ Τυπικόν, ἀλλὰ ἔχει ὀρθῶς συμπεριλειφθεῖ εἰς τὸ Μηναῖον εἰς τὴν Θ. Λειτουργίαν τῆς ιδ΄ Σεπτεμβρίου.]

*(Printed Page 174)*

=== LEAF p190 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 14: Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross — Liturgy Antiphons & Non-Hierarchical Order (p. 175)]

175

(Note: One must bear in mind that this order of the Elevation of the Cross takes place in the Great Church and only if there is a presiding Archpriest; in the absence of the Patriarch or the Archpriest, only the officiating Priest does the Elevation, as in the other Holy Churches; but at the fourth Elevation the Priest says “Again we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, forgiveness and remission of the sins of the servants of God, the Ushers, parishioners and supporters of this holy Church together with their wives and children.” At the fifth elevation he says: “Again we pray for the souls of all Orthodox Christians, for their health and salvation, and the remission of their sins.”)

7.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

Antiphon One, Mode II
My God, my God, look upon me: why have You forsaken me?
The words of my transgressions are far from my salvation.
O my God, I cry in the daytime, but You hear not.
But You, the praise of Israel, dwell in the sanctuary.
By the intercessions of the Theotokos...

Antiphon Two, Mode II
O God, why have You cast us off for ever?
Remember Your congregation, which You have purchased of old.
This is Mount Zion wherein You have dwelt.
God is our King of old: working salvation in the midst of the earth.
Save us O Son of God... Who were crucified in the flesh...

[Antiphon Three, Mode I]*
The Lord reigns, let the people rage
The Lord is great in Zion: and He is high above all the people.
Let them give thanks to Your great name
Save, O Lord, Your people...

* [This line, indicating the numbers of the Antiphon and the Mode is missing in the Typikon but is correctly included in the Mineon for the Divine Liturgy of the 14th of September.]

*(Printed Page 175)*
