=== LEAF p861 ===
[Original Greek Text: Service of the Akathist Hymn Concluded (§ Appendix 4) (p. 846)]

846

Πατριάρχου, ἐπίσης καὶ οἱ Διάκονοι πάντες ἐξελθόντες τῆς νοτίου
τοῦ Ἱεροῦ Πύλης μετὰ τοῦ Ἐκκλησιάρχου καὶ τῶν Ἱερέων,
λαμβάνουσι τὰς οἰκείας θέσεις, ἤτοι ὁ μὲν Ἐκκλησιάρχης καὶ οἱ
Ἱερεῖς ἵστανται ἀπέναντι τοῦ Πατριάρχου, οἱ δὲ Διάκονοι ἐκ δεξιῶν
τοῦ Θρόνου· ὁ Ἀναγνώστης Ἱερεὺς ἐξακολουθεῖ λέγων μετὰ τὸ
Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον μ΄ καὶ τὸ Ὁ ἐν παντὶ
καιρῷ, ὁ Πατριάρχης τὸ Ὁ Θεὸς οἰκτιρήσαι ἡμᾶς καὶ οἱ
Κανονάρχαι τὸ Ἄσπιλε ἀμόλυντε καὶ τὸ Καὶ δὸς ἡμῖν,
Δέσποτα. Μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ Ἱερεὺς λέγει τὴν μικρὰν Ἀπόλυσιν καὶ
Εὐξώμεθα. Εἰς τὸ τέλος δὲ οἱ Χοροὶ ψάλλουσι μετὰ μέλους τὸ
Κάθισμα Τὴν ὡραιότητα τῆς παρθενίας σου· τούτου
πληρωθέντος, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται τοῦ Θρόνου καὶ εὐλογήσας
ἐξέρχεται, τοῦ Ἱερέως ἐκφωνοῦντος ἐκ τοῦ ἱεροῦ Βήματος τὸ Δι'
εὐχῶν τοῦ ἁγίου Δεσπότου ἡμῶν, Κύριε Ἰησοῦ Χριστὲ ὁ
Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς. Ἀμήν.*****

----------
***** Πλὴν αὐτῆς τῆς κατακλείσεως λέγεται [ἔστιν ὅτε καὶ ὁ] Πατριάρχης ἐκφωνεῖ· Δι' εὐχῶν τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων ἡμῶν, Κύριε Ἰησοῦ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς. Ἀμήν.

*(Printed Page 846)*

=== LEAF p862 ===
[English Facing Translation: Service of the Akathist Hymn Concluded (§ Appendix 4) (p. 847)]

847

shaped knobs and a candle in between them] comes and stands, according
to the order of service, across from the Patriarch. Also, all the Deacons,
exiting from the South Gate of the Sanctuary with the Ecclesiarch and the
Priests, take their designated positions: the Ecclesiarch and the Priests
opposite the Patriarch, and the Deacons on the right side of the [Patriarchal]
Throne. The Reader-Priest continues reciting the Kontakion "To the
Champion General," and then "Lord, have mercy" (40 times) and the "You
Who at all times." Then the Patriarch recites "May God be merciful to us."
The Canonarchs then intone [the prayers] "O spotless, undefiled" and the
"And grant to us, O Master." After these prayers, the Priest says the Small
Dismissal Prayer and the "Let us pray [for the peace of the world"]. At the
end, the Choirs sing melodiously "The beauty of your virginity." Upon the
completion of this hymn, the Patriarch descends from the Throne, and,
blessing the people exits the Church, while the Priest exclaims from the Holy
Sanctuary "Through the prayers of our Holy Master, Lord Jesus Christ
our God, have mercy on us. Amen." *****

----------
***** [At some point before this exclamation by the Priest, the Patriarch exclaims 'Through the prayers of our Holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us. Amen.']

*(Printed Page 847)*

=== LEAF p863 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Service of the Holy Passion in the Patriarchal Church (p. 848)]

848

Η
ΕΝ ΤΩ ΠΑΤΡΙΑΡΧΙΚΩ ΝΑΩ
ΤΑΞΙΣ ΤΗΣ ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΙΑΣ
ΤΩΝ ΑΓΙΩΝ ΠΑΘΩΝ
----------

Τῇ ἁγίᾳ καὶ Μεγάλῃ Πέμπτῃ ἑσπέρας, περὶ τὴν ιβ΄ ὥραν
κρούουσιν οἱ κώδωνες, ἡ δὲ Αὐτοῦ Θ. Παναγιότης [ὁ Πατριάρχης]
κατέρχεται [ἐν τῷ Ναῷ] περὶ τὴν ἡμίσειαν ὥραν μετὰ τῆς
ἀκολούθου παρατάξεως. Προπορευομένων τεσσάρων κλητήρων ῥαβδούχων
καὶ ἀγγελλόντων τὴν ἔλευσιν τοῦ Πατριάρχου, ἕπεται ἅπας ὁ ἱερὸς
τῶν ἐφημερίων κλῆρος μετὰ τοῦ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτου βαδίζων στοιχηδὸν
πρὸ τοῦ Πατριάρχου ὡς καὶ ὁ Μ. Ἐκκλησιάρχης φέρων τὴν
πατριαρχικὴν ποιμαντικὴν ῥάβδον· τούτοις δὲ ἕπεται ὁ Πατριάρχης
κρατῶν χαζράνιον, συμβαδίζουσι δὲ τῷ Πατριάρχῃ ὁ Μ. Πρωτοσύγκελλος
ἐκ δεξιῶν καὶ ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος ἐξ εὐωνύμων, καὶ ἕπεται ὁ
Δευτερεύων, ὁ Τριτεύων καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν Διακόνων· ὅταν φθάσωσιν
ἔμπροσθεν τῆς Μ. πύλης τοῦ Ναοῦ, ὁ Πατριάρχης ἐνδύεται παρὰ τοῦ
Μ. Ἀρχιδιακόνου τὸν Μανδύαν, ὁ δὲ Μ. Ἐκκλησιάρχης δίδωσι τῷ
Πρωτοσυγκέλλῳ τὴν ῥάβδον καὶ οὗτος ἐγχειρίζει ταύτην τῷ
Πατριάρχῃ ἀσπαζόμενος τὴν δεξιὰν αὐτοῦ, διὰ τῆς αὐτῆς δὲ
τάξεως εἰσέρχονται ἅπαντες εἰς τὸν Ναὸν προπορευομένου τοῦ Μ.
Πριμικηρίου φέροντος τὸ μέγα κηροπήγιον (διβάμβουλον). Φθάσας
ὁ Πατριάρχης ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τοῦ Ναοῦ εὐλογεῖ τὸν λαόν, τῶν Χορῶν

*(Printed Page 848)*

=== LEAF p864 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Service of the Holy Passion in the Patriarchal Church (p. 849)]

849

THE ORDER OF THE SERVICE OF
THE HOLY PASSION

AS SERVED IN THE PATRIARCHAL
CHURCH
----------

On Holy and Great Thursday evening, about the Twelfth Hour {6
p.m.} the bells ring. About a half hour later His All-Holiness [the
Patriarch] comes down [to the Church] with his entourage. Preced-
ing him are four staff-bearing ushers announcing the arrival of the Patriarch.
Then all the priests of the Church, with the Great Archimandrite, walk row
by row before the Patriarch, as does the Great Ecclesiarch carrying the
Patriarchal Pastoral Staff. After these, comes the Patriarch with a CHAZRANION
[unadorned walking staff].* Walking with the Patriarch are the GREAT
CHANCELLOR (on his right side) and the GREAT ARCHDEACON (on his left). Then
follow the Second Deacon, the Third Deacon, and the rest of the Deacons.
When they arrive in front of the Great Gate of the Church, the Patriarch is
vested by the Great Archdeacon with the Mandya [Mantle]. The Great
Ecclesiarch gives the [Patriarchal] Staff to the Chancellor, who in turn hands
it over to the Patriarch, kissing his right hand. In this order, all of them enter
the Church, preceded by the GREAT PRIMIKIRIOS [Leader of Processions; also
a participant in the chanting of the chanters], who carries the great knobbed
candle stick [the DIVAMVULON]. Arriving in the middle of the Church, the
Patriarch blesses the people, while the Choirs chant "For many years,

----------
* [A plain walking staff appropriate in its lack of ornamentation to the solemnity of Great (Holy) Week.]

*(Printed Page 849)*

=== LEAF p865 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Service of the Holy Passion Continued (p. 850)]

850

ψαλλόντων τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη καὶ ἀνέρχεται εἰς τὸν Θρόνον· ὁ Μ.
Ἀρχιμανδρίτης τότε, ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος καὶ ὁ Δευτερεύων
λαμβάνουσι καιρὸν παρὰ τοῦ Πατριάρχου ἕπονται δὲ ὁ Τριτεύων καὶ
οἱ λοιποὶ Διάκονοι καὶ εἰσέρχονται εἰς τὸ ἅγιον Βῆμα οἱ μὲν διὰ τῆς
τοῦ βορείου κλίτους πύλης, οἱ δὲ διὰ τῆς τοῦ νοτίου, καὶ μένει παρὰ
τῷ Πατριάρχῃ μόνος ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος· ὁ δὲ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτης,
στὰς ἐνώπιον τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης μετ’ Ἐπιτραχηλίου ἐκφωνεῖ
Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ ὁ Πατριάρχης ἄρχεται Δόξα σοι
ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν δόξα σοι· Βασιλεῦ Οὐράνιε Παράκλητε κτλ., ὁ
δὲ ταχθεὶς Ἀναγνώστης Ἱερεὺς ἱστάμενος ἀπέναντι τοῦ Πατριάρχου
ἄρχεται ἀναγινώσκειν τὸ Τρισάγιον μετὰ μέλους καὶ τοὺς πρὸ τοῦ
Ἑξαψάλμου δύο ψαλμούς· ἀρχομένου δὲ τοῦ α΄ ψαλμοῦ, ὁ Μ.
Ἀρχιμανδρίτης ἐξέρχεται τῆς βορείου τοῦ Ἱεροῦ πύλης, προπορευομένου
λαμπαδούχου, ἐνδεδυμένος Φελώνιον μετ’ Ἐπιτραχηλίου καὶ φέρων
θυμιατὸν (Κατζὶ), θυμιᾷ, ὡς εἴθισται, ἅπαντα τὸν λαὸν καὶ ἐπιστρέψας
ἵσταται ἐνώπιον τῆς Ὡραίας Πύλης καὶ ἐκφωνεῖ μετὰ τὸ δεύτερον
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία, ὁ Ἀναγνώστης εἶτα τὸ
Σῶσον Κύριε τὸν λαόν σου καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ δύο Τροπάρια· ὁ δὲ
Ἀρχιμανδρίτης Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς κτλ. καὶ ἀκολούθως τὴν
ἐκφώνησιν Ὅτι ἐλεήμων καὶ φιλάνθρωπος, καὶ εὐθὺς Δόξα τῇ
ἁγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοουσίῳ καὶ ζωοποιῷ καὶ ἀδιαιρέτῳ Τριάδι πάντοτε
νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων καὶ ὁ Πατριάρχης
ἄρχεται τοῦ Ἑξαψάλμου· τούτου πληρωθέντος, ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτης
λέγει τὴν Μ, Συναπτὴν καὶ μετὰ τὴν Συναπτὴν ἄρχονται οἱ Χοροὶ
ψάλλειν τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα μετὰ μέλους τετράκις, λέγοντες καὶ τοὺς
συνήθεις Στίχους Ἐκ νυκτὸς ὀρθρίζει· Δικαιοσύνην μάθετε·
Πρόσθες αὐτοῖς κακά· Ζῆλος λήψεται λαόν, καὶ τὸ Ὅτε οἱ
ἔνδοξοι μαθηταί, δὶς μὲν ἀργῶς ἅπαξ δὲ ἀργοσυντόμως· [ὁ Βιολάκης
λανθασμένως ἔχει ἐδῶ ἀντιστρέψει τὴν σειρὰν τῶν δύο τελευταίων
στίχων] τὰ δύο τελευταῖα λέγονται σὺν τῷ Δόξα, καὶ νῦν ἀρχυμένου
τοῦ μέλους, οἱ μέλλοντες χοροστατῆσαι Ἀρχιερεῖς ἐξέρχονται τῆς
νοτίου τοῦ Ἱεροῦ Βήματος πύλης προπορευομένου τοῦ Μ. Ἐκκλησιάρχου
καὶ ἵστανται ἕκαστος κατὰ τάξιν ἐν τῇ οἰκείᾳ αὐτοῦ θέσει, ὁ δὲ
Ἐκκλησιάρχης ποιήσας σχῆμα τῷ Πατριάρχῃ εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν
Βῆμα, εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος ποιήσας σχῆμα εἰσέρχεται εἰς
τὸ Ἱερόν, ἵνα ἐνδυθῇ ἀφεὶς εἰς τὴν θέσιν του ἕνα τῶν Διακόνων·
ἀρχομένου τοῦ β΄ Χοροῦ ψάλλειν τὸ β΄ Ὅτε οἱ ἔνδοξοι Μαθηταί,
ὁ μὲν Ἀρχιδιάκονος μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν διακόνων ἐξέρχονται ἀπὸ

*(Printed Page 850)*

=== LEAF p866 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Service of the Holy Passion Continued (p. 851)]

851

[Master]," and he then ascends the [Patriarchal] Throne. Then, the Great
Archimandrite, the Great Archdeacon and the Second Deacon receive
Keron [permission from the Patriarch to participate in the service]. Then
follow the Third Deacon and the rest of the Deacons. They then enter the
Holy Vima [Sanctuary], the former group by the North Gate, the latter group
by the South Gate; only the Great Archdeacon remains by the Patriarch. The
Great Archimandrite, standing before the Holy Table and wearing an
Epitrachilion, exclaims: "Blessed is our God," and the Patriarch begins
"Glory to You, our God, glory to You. Heavenly King, Comforter," etc.
The designated Priest-Reader, standing opposite the Patriarch, begins to
recite melodiously the Trisagion and the two psalms before the Exapsalmos
[Psalms 20 and 21]. As the first Psalm is begun, the Great Archimandrite,
wearing the Phelonion and the Epitrachilion, preceded by a candle-bearer,
exits the Holy Sanctuary through the North Gate, carrying a hand censer
[Katzion]. He censes, as usual, all the people, and then, returning, stands
before the Beautiful Gate and exclaims after the second Trisagion "For
Yours is the Kingdom." The Reader then recites the "O Lord, save Your
people" and the two other Troparia [hymns] after it. The Archimandrite:
"Have mercy upon us, O God," etc. and, following that, the Exclamation
"For You are merciful and loves mankind." And immediately: "Glory be
to the holy and consubstantial, and life-creating, and undivided Trinity,
always, now and ever, and to the ages of ages." The Patriarch then begins
the Exapsalmos. When this is completed, the Great Archimandrite says the
Great Litany and, after this, the Choirs begin to sing the "Alleluia"
melodiously four times, saying the customary verses before it: "My spirit
seeks You early in the nightwatches." "Learn righteousness." "Envy
shall seize upon an untaught people." "Bring more evils upon them, O
Lord." {Here, in an apparent editorial error, Violakis has reversed in the
original text the order of the last two verses.} Then we chant the "When
the glorious disciples" slowly. Glory, repeat the hymn slowly. Now and
ever, repeat the hymn more rapidly. At the begining of the chanting of this
hymn, the Hierarchs who are going to participate in the Service, exit the Holy
Sanctuary from the South Gate, preceded by the Great Ecclesiarch, and
stand each in his own designated position. The Great Ecclesiarch, after
making a sign to the Patriarch, enters into the Holy Sanctuary. Immediately
also the Great Archdeacon, after making a sign to the Patriarch, enters into
the Holy Sanctuary in order to put on his vestments, leaving in his place one
of the other Deacons. As the Second Choir begins to chant for the second
time "When the glorious disciples," the Archdeacon with the rest of the

*(Printed Page 851)*

=== LEAF p867 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Service of the Holy Passion Continued (p. 852)]

852

τῆς Ὡραίας Πύλης ἐνδεδυμένοι τὰς ἱερὰς αὐτῶν στολάς, καὶ
κρατοῦντες ὁ μὲν Ἀρχιδιάκονος καὶ ὁ Δευτερεύων τὰ τρικήρια,
ὁ δὲ Τριτεύων καὶ ὁ δ΄ τῶν Διακόνων τὰ δικήρια, ἵστανται περὶ
τὸν θρόνον, ἐκ δεξιῶν μὲν ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος μετὰ τοῦ
Τριτεύοντος, ἐξ ἀριστερῶν δὲ ὁ Δευτερεύων καὶ ὁ ἕτερος·
ἀρχομένου δὲ τοῦ α΄ Χοροῦ ψάλλειν τὸ τρίτον Ὅτε οἱ ἔνδοξοι
Μαθηταὶ ἀργοσυντόμως, ὁ Πατριάρχης κατέρχεται τοῦ θρόνου,
καὶ προπορευομένων τοῦ Ἐκκλησιάρχου, τοῦ Πριμικηρίου καὶ
τῶν Διακόνων εἰσέρχεται διὰ τῆς Ὡραίας Πύλης εἰς τὸ Ἱερόν,
καὶ ἐνδύεται Ἐπιτραχήλιον καὶ Ὠμοφόριον. Εἶτα τιθέασιν
ἔμπροσθεν τῆς Ὡραίας πύλης τὸ Τρισκέλιον καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ τὸ
ἱερὸν Εὐαγγέλιον, καὶ οἱ μὲν Διάκονοι ἐξερχόμενοι ἵστανται
ἀνὰ δύο περὶ αὐτὸ κρατοῦντες τὰ δικηροτρίκηρα, ὁ δὲ
Πριμικήριος μετὰ τῆς Λαμπάδος ἀπέναντι τῆς Ὡραίας πύλης·
πληρωθέντος δὲ τοῦ μέλους, ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος ἐκφωνεῖ Καὶ
ὑπὲρ τοῦ καταξιωθῆναι ἡμᾶς τῆς ἀκροάσεως τοῦ ἁγίου
Εὐαγγελίου κτλ., ὁ Πατριάρχης Εἰρήνη πᾶσι, οἱ χοροὶ Καὶ
τῷ πνεύματί σου, ὁ Πατριάρχης Ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ Ἰωάννην
ἁγίου Εὐαγγελίου τὸ ἀνάγνωσμα, ὁ Ἀρχιδιάκονος Πρόσχωμεν·
καὶ ἀναγινώσκει τὸ [Α΄] ἱερὸν Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Καινῆς
Διαθήκης, τοῦ λαοῦ ἐν πάσῃ εὐλαβείᾳ καὶ προσοχῇ ἀκρωμένου·
τούτου πληρωθέντος, εὐλογήσας τὸν λαὸν διὰ τρικηρίου, τῶν
Χορῶν ψαλλόντων τὸ Εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη, εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν
Βῆμα καὶ ἀποθέσας τὸ Ἐπιτραχήλιον καὶ τὸ Ὠμοφόριον ἐπὶ
τῆς ἁγίας Τραπέζης ἐξέρχεται, προπορευομένου τοῦ Πριμικηρίου
καὶ τῶν δύο Διακόνων, καὶ ἵσταται αὖθις ἐπὶ τοῦ θρόνου,
ὁ δὲ Πριμικήριος ποιήσας σχῆμα τῷ Πατριάρχῃ,
ἀποχωρεῖ, ταυτοχρόνως δὲ καὶ ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιδιάκονος
μετὰ τοῦ Δευτερεύοντος ἀποχωροῦσι καὶ ἐκδυθέντες τὰς
ἱερετικὰς αὐτῶν στολὰς ἐξέρχονται καὶ ἵστανται παρὰ τὸν
θρόνον τοῦ Πατριάρχου. Ἀρχομένων δὲ τῶν Χορῶν ψάλλειν τὰ
Ἀντίφωνα, εἰς τὸ β΄ Ἀντίφωνον ὁ Μ. Ἐκκλησιάρχης μετὰ τοῦ
Τριτεύοντος καὶ τοῦ ἑτέρου τῶν Διακόνων ἐξέρχονται τῆς
Ὡραίας Πύλης, καὶ οἱ μὲν ἵστανται περὶ αὐτήν, ὁ δὲ
Ἐκκλησιάρχης προσέρχεται τῷ πρωτοθρόνῳ Ἀρχιερεῖ καὶ
προσκαλεῖ αὐτὸν διὰ σχήματος· οὗτος δὲ ἀσπασάμενος τὴν
χεῖρα τοῦ Πατριάρχου εἰσέρχεται εἰς τὸ Ἱερὸν προπορευομένου
τοῦ τε Ἐκκλησιάρχου καὶ τῶν Διακόνων, οἵτινες ἐξέρχονται
αὖθις καὶ ἵστανται περὶ τὸ Τρισκέλιον κρατοῦντες δικηροτρίκηρα,
ὁ δὲ ἐνδύεται Ἐπιτραχήλιον καὶ Ὠμοφόριον· πληρωθέντος δὲ
τοῦ Καθίσματος Ἐν τῷ δείπνῳ τοὺς μαθητὰς διατρέφων, ὁ
Τριτεύων ἐκφωνεῖ Καὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ καταξιωθῆναι ἡμᾶς, ὁ
Πατριάρχης Εἰρήνη πᾶσι, οἱ Χοροὶ Καὶ μετὰ τοῦ πνεύματός
σου, ὁ Ἀρχιερεὺς ἔρχεται παρὰ τῷ Τρισκελίῳ καὶ ἀναγινώσκει τὸ
Β΄ Εὐαγγέλιον, οὗ πληρωθέντος, ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει συντόμως τὸ
Δόξα τῇ μακροθυμίᾳ σου, Κύριε, δόξα σοι, ὅπερ ψάλλεται

*(Printed Page 852)*

=== LEAF p868 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Service of the Holy Passion Continued (p. 853)]

853

Deacons, dressed in their sacred vestments and carrying the Dikirotrikira,
exit from the Holy Sanctuary through the Beautiful Gate. The Archdeacon
and the Second Deacon hold Trikiria [3-candle candelabra]; the Third and
the Fourth Deacons hold the Dikiria [2-candle candelabra]. To the right of
the [Patriarchal] Throne stand the Great Archdeacon and the Third Deacon;
to the left, the Second and the Fourth Deacon. As the First Choir begins to
chant for the third time "When the glorious disciples" more rapidly, the
Patriarch descends the Throne, and, preceded by the Ecclesiarch, the
Primikirios, and the Deacons enters into the Holy Sanctuary through the
Beautiful Gate, and puts on the Epitrachilion and the Omophorion. Then the
Holy Gospel is placed upon the Triskelion [three-legged stand] in front of
the Beautiful Gate. The Deacons, having come out from the Holy Sanctuary,
stand two-by-two on either side of the stand, holding the Dikirotrikira. The
Primikirios with a candle stands opposite the Beautiful Gate. When the
Troparion ["When the glorious disciples"] is completed, the Great Arch-
deacon exclaims "Let us supplicate the Lord, our God, that we may be
deemed worthy to hear the Holy Gospel," etc. The Patriarch: "Peace be
with you all." The Choirs: "And with your spirit." The Patriarch: "The
reading is from the Holy Gospel according to John." The Archdeacon:
"Let us attend." [The Patriarch] reads the [First] Holy Gospel from the
New Testament [John 13:31-18:1], the congregation listening with full
piety and attention. The Gospel having been completed, the Patriarch
blesses the people with the Trikirion, as the Choirs sing "For many years,
[Master]." The Patriarch enters the Holy Sanctuary, and, having removed
his Epitrachilion and Omophorion and placed them on the Holy Table,
preceded by the Primikirios and the two Deacons, exits the Holy Sanctuary
and stands again on his Throne. The Primikirios, making a sign to the
Patriarch, withdraws. At the same time, the Great Archdeacon and the
Second Deacon also withdraw and, taking off their sacred vestments, return
and stand by the throne of the Patriarch. The Choirs begin to chant the
Antiphons. At the Second Antiphon the Great Ecclesiarch, the Third
Deacon, and another of the Deacons exit [the Holy Sanctuary] through the
Beautiful Gate. The Deacons stand on either side of it, while the Ecclesiarch
comes to the Bishop oldest in seniority and calls him forth with a sign. This
Bishop, after kissing the Patriarch's hand, enters the Holy Sanctuary,
preceded by the Ecclesiarch and the Deacons. The Deacons exit once again
and stand around the Triskelion, holding Dikirotrikira. The Bishop, in the
meantime, vests with the Epitrachilion and the Omophorion. At the
completion of the Kathisma "Sustaining the disciples at the supper,"

*(Printed Page 853)*

=== LEAF p869 ===
[Original Greek Text: Order of the Service of the Holy Passion Continued (p. 854)]

854

ἐναλλὰξ ὑπὸ τῶν Χορῶν εἰς ἕκαστον τῶν Εὐαγγελίων, ἐξαιρουμένου
τοῦ τελευταίου· ἡ δὲ πρὸς τοὺς χοροστατοῦντας καὶ μέλλοντας
ἀναπρόσκλησις ἐπαναλαμβάνεται εἰς ἕνα ἕκαστον τῶν Ἀρχιερέων
κατὰ τάξιν μέχρι τοῦ τελευταίου. Μετὰ τοὺς Ἀρχιερεῖς τὰ
ἐναπολειπόμενα Εὐαγγέλια ἀναγινώσκονται ὑπὸ τοῦ Μ. Πρωτοσυγκέλλου,
τοῦ Ἀρχιγραμματέως, τοῦ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτου, τοῦ Συγκέλλου καὶ
καθεξῆς· διὰ τούτους ὅμως οἱ Διάκονοι ἔσωθεν τοῦ Βήματος
ἱστάμενοι ἐκφωνοῦσιν ἐκ περιτροπῆς τὸ Καὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ καταξιωθῆναι
ἡμᾶς. Πληρωθέντος τοῦ Β΄ Εὐαγγελίου, ἄρχεται ὁ β΄ χορὸς ψάλλειν
τὸ δ΄ Ἀντίφωνον μέχρι τοῦ Καθίσματος Ποῖός σε τρόπος Ἰούδα,
καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Γ΄ Εὐαγγέλιον· μετὰ τὸ τέλος, ὁ β΄ Χορὸς
τὸ Δόξα τῇ μακροθυμίᾳ σου Κύριε, καὶ ὁ α΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει τὸ
ζ΄ Ἀντίφωνον μέχρι τοῦ Καθίσματος Ὢ πῶς Ἰούδας ὁ ποτὲ
μαθητὴς καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ Δ΄ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἶτα ὁ β΄ Χορὸς
τὸ ι΄ Ἀντίφωνον μέχρι τοῦ Καθίσματος Ὅτε παρέστης τῷ
Καϊάφᾳ ὁ Θεὸς καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ [Ε΄] Εὐαγγέλιον· μετὰ
τοῦτο , ὁ α΄ Χορὸς τὸ ιγ΄ Ἀντίφωνον μέχρι τοῦ θεοτοκίου τροπαρίου
Χαῖρε ἡ δι’ Ἀγγέλου τὴν χαρὰν τοῦ κόσμου δεξαμένη· τότε
ὁ Μ. Ἀρχιμανδρίτης, ἐνδεδυμένος Ἐπιτραχήλιον καὶ Φελώνιον,
αἴρει τὸν Ἐσταυρωμένον καὶ ποιήσας κύκλον περὶ τὴν ἁγίαν
Τράπεζαν, ψάλλων κατὰ τὸ ὕφος τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου ἐν κατανύξει τὸ
Ἰδιόμελον Σήμερον κρεμᾶται ἐπὶ ξύλου, ἐξέρχεται τῆς βορείου
τοῦ ἱεροῦ Βήματος πύλης προπορευομένων τοῦ Πριμικηρίου, τῶν
Λαμπαδούχων, καὶ δύο Διακόνων θυμιώντων καὶ φθάνει εἰς τὸ μέσον
τοῦ Ναοῦ, ἔνθα πήγνυται ὁ Σταυρός1· ὁ δὲ α΄ Χορὸς ἐπαναλαμβάνει
τὸ αὐτὸ Ἰδιόμελον ψάλλων αὐτὸ εἰς τὸν ἦχον του· εἶτα ὁ β΄ Χορὸς
Μὴ ὡς Ἰουδαῖοι ἑορτάσωμεν κτλ. μέχρι τοῦ Καθίσματος
Ἐξηγόρασας ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῆς κατάρας τοῦ Νόμου καὶ
ἀναγινώσκεται τὸ ΣΤ΄ Εὐαγγέλιον. Μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ α΄ Χορὸς
ἄρχεται τῶν Μακαρισμῶν Ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ σου μνήσθητι ἡμῶν,
Κύριε, ὁ δὲ β΄ Χορὸς ἐρχόμενος εἰς τὸν Μακαρισμὸν Μακάριοι
οἱ πεινῶντες καὶ διψῶντες τὴν δικαιοσύνην ψάλλει τὸ

----------
1. Ἐν τῷ πατριαρχικῷ ναῷ (ὡς καὶ ἐν Ἁγίῳ Ὄρει μέχρι τοῦδε) ἡ ἔξοδος αὕτη τοῦ
Ἐσταυρωμένου οὐκ ἐγίνετο μέχρι τῆς πατριαρχείας Σωφρονίου τοῦ ἀπὸ Ἀμασείας
(1864), καθόσον οὔτε τὸ Τριῴδιον σημειοῖ τοιαύτην τινὰ τάξιν, οὔτε τὸ ἀρχαῖον
Τυπικὸν· ἤδη ὅμως καθιερώθη, οὕτως εἰπεῖν, καὶ ὁ λαὸς φαίνεται ποθῶν ἵνα
εὐλαβῶς προσκυνήσῃ τῇ ὥρᾳ ταύτῃ τὸν διὰ τὰς ἡμετέρας ἁμαρτίας ἀναρτηθέντα
ἐπὶ τοῦ ξύλου τοῦ Σταυροῦ Θεάνθρωπον.

*(Printed Page 854)*

=== LEAF p870 ===
[English Facing Translation: Order of the Service of the Holy Passion Continued (p. 855)]

855

the Third Deacon exclaims "Let us supplicate the Lord, our God." The
Patriarch: "Peace be with you all." The Choirs: "And with Your spirit."
The Bishop comes to the Triskelion and reads the Second Gospel [John
18:1-28]. When this is completed, the First Choir sings rapidly "Glory to
Your forbearance, Lord, glory to You," which response is sung alternately
by the Choirs at each of the Gospel readings, except the last one. The same
invitation to read the Gospel is made by the Ecclesiarch to each of the
subsequently officiating Bishops down to the last one, according to the order
of seniority. After the Bishops, the Great Chancellor, the Chief Secretary,
the Great Archimandrite, the Chancellor, and the remaining high-ranking
clergymen read the rest of the Gospels. For these clergymen [who come after
the Bishops], however, the Deacons stand inside the Holy Sanctuary when
they alternately exclaim "Let us supplicate the Lord, our God." At the
completion of the Second Gospel, the Second Choir begins chanting the 4th
Antiphon until the Kathisma "What reason, O Judas." Then the Third
Gospel [Matthew 26:57-75] is read. After the end, the Second Choir sings
"Glory to Your forbearance, Lord," and the First Choir chants the 7th
Antiphon until the Kathisma "O how did Judas, Your past disciple," and the
Fourth Gospel [John 18:28-19:16] is read. Then the Second Choir chants
the 10th Antiphon until the Kathisma "When You, our God, stood before
Caiphas," and the [Fifth] Gospel [Matthew 27: 3-32] is read. After this, the
First Choir begins the 13th Antiphon until the Theotokion Troparion "Hail!
you who has received through an angel the joy of the world." Then the
Great Archimandrite, vested with an Epitrachilion and a Phelonion, lifts the
Cross with the effigy on the Crucified Christ on it and, circling around the
Holy Table, chants in the style of the Gospel [in a recitative style] with deep
reverence the Idiomelon "Today is hung upon the Tree." He exits the Holy
Sanctuary through the North Gate, preceded by the Primikirios, the Candle-
bearers, and two censing Deacons. He arrives at the middle of the Church,
where the Cross is fixed into an opening on the floor in an erect position.1
The First Choir repeats the same Idiomelon, chanting it in Mode II Plagal.
Then the Second Choir chants "Let us not celebrate as the Jews," etc., until
the Kathisma "You ransomed us from the curse of the Law," and then the

----------
1. In the Patriarchal Church (as well as on the Holy Mountain [Mt. Athos] until now) the procession of the Crucified did not occur until the Patriarchate of Sofronios from Amasia (1864), in as much as neither the Triodion nor the ancient Typikon notes such a practice. In our time, however, this practice has already become sanctioned, so to speak, since the people appear desirous during this hour to reverently venerate the God-Man, Who for our sins was suspended upon the wood of the Cross.

*(Printed Page 855)*
