=== LEAF p501 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XVIII Concl. (§ 60), Apodosis (§ 61), and Situation XIX Opening (§ 62) (p. 486)]

486

60.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς· εἰς τὸ
β΄ Ἀντίφωνον Ὁ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθείς, εἰς τὸ γ΄ Ἀντίφωνον Τὴν
κοινὴν ἀνάστασιν· τὸ Εἰσοδικὸν τῆς ἑορτῆς Εὐαγγελίζεσθε
ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας . . . σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ δι᾿ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθείς·
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς, τῶν Βαΐων, καὶ Κοντάκιον Τῇ
ὑπερμάχῳ, τὸ Τρισάγιον· Ἀπόστολος τῆς ἑορτῆς, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον
τῶν Βαΐων. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ
Θεοῦ, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐξελέξατο Κύριος, Τὴν κοινὴν ἀνάστασιν
καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

Ἡ Ἀπόδοσις.

61.    Τὸ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα γ΄
τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τῶν Βαΐων Ἰδιόμελα Χαῖρε καὶ εὐφραίνου, καὶ γ΄ τὰ
Βουλὴν προαιώνιον· Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. Εἴσοδος,
Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας Ἰδοὺ δὴ εὐλογεῖτε τὸν
Κύριον πάντες οἱ δοῦλοι Κυρίου. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα
τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἐκ βαΐων καὶ κλάδων, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς
εὐαγγέλια· μετὰ δὲ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις, ψάλλονται αἱ τρεῖς Ὠδαὶ τοῦ
Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἰωσὴφ τὴν σωφροσύνην. Μετὰ τὸν Εἱρμὸν τῆς
θ΄ τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς ἐκ τρίτου, καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.
    Περὶ τὴν α΄ ὥραν τῆς νυκτὸς (7 μ.μ.) ψάλλεται ἡ τοῦ Ὄρθρου
τοῦ Νυμφίου Ἀκολουθία, κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Τριῳδίου διάταξιν, ὡς καὶ
πρωΐ, τῇ Μ. Δευτέρᾳ, ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων, ὡς εἴθισται
(ὅρα τὴν διάταξιν ἐν τῷ Τυπικῷ τοῦ Τριῳδίου).

ΙΘ΄.

62.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Μ. Δευτέρᾳ, τῇ Κυριακῇ τῶν Βαΐων
ἑσπέρας, ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τῶν
Ἀποστίχων τῶν Βαΐων Χαῖρε καὶ εὐφραίνου (αὐτὰ εἶναι τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα τοῦ ἑσπερινοῦ Σαββάτου), Δόξα, Ὁ ἔχων θρόνον οὐρανὸν
(αὐτὸς εἶναι ὁ δεύτερος ὕμνος τῶν Κεκραγαρίων τοῦ ἑσπερινοῦ
Σαββάτου), Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν,
τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας Ἰδοὺ δὴ εὐλογεῖτε τὸν Κύριον πάντες

*(Printed Page 486)*

=== LEAF p502 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Eighteen Concl. (§ 60), The Leave-taking (§ 61), and Situation Nineteen Opening (§ 62) (p. 487)]

487

60.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast: at the 2nd Antiphon “He
who was incarnate for our sake”; at the 3rd Antiphon the Apolytikion
“Giving us before Your Passion.” The Entrance Hymn of the Feast
“Proclaim His salvation from day to day... save us... who was incarnate
for us.” The Apolytikion of the Feast, that of the Palms, and the Kontakion
“To the Champion General.” The Trisagios Hymn; Epistle of the Feast
[Hebrews 2:11-18] and the Gospel of the Palms [John 12:1-18]. At
Especially, “O Earth, announce... As a live ark of God,” Communion
Hymn “The Lord has chosen Zion,” the Apolytikion “Giving us before
Your Passion,” and Dismissal.

The Leave-taking

61.    In the evening, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have
cried,” we chant the 3 Idiomela Aposticha of the Palms “Rejoice and be
glad” and the 3 Hymns “Revealing the pre-eternal will,” Glory, Now and
ever, “Sent down from heaven.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” and the
Prokimenon of the day {“Behold now, bless the Lord, all you servants of
the Lord”}. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela of the Triodion “With laurels
and branches,” Glory, Now and ever, “Today is the announcement of
joy”; after “Now let,” the three Odes of the Canon “You faithful, let us
follow Joseph in his chastity” are sung; after the Irmos of the 9th Ode, the
Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Feast (three times), and Dismissal.
    About the 1st Hour of the night {7 pm} the Matins of the Bride-
groom of Holy and Great Monday is chanted according to the order of the
Triodion; in the morning of Holy Monday, the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified
Gifts is celebrated, as customary (see the order in the Typikon of the
Triodion).

SITUATION NINETEEN

62.    If the Feast occurs on Holy Monday, on Palm Sunday evening, in
the Great Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” we
chant the 3 Prosomia of the Feast and the 3 Idiomela of the Aposticha of the
Palms “Rejoice and be glad, O city of Zion” {these are the Aposticha of the
Saturday evening Vespers}, Glory “The one who has heaven as a throne”
{this is the second hymn of Vespers at Lord I have cried on Saturday
evening}, Now and ever, “Sent from heaven.” Entrance, “O Gladsome
Light,” the Prokimenon of the day {“Behold now, bless the Lord, all you

*(Printed Page 487)*

=== LEAF p503 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XIX Concl. (§ 62) and Situation XX Opening (§ 63) (p. 488)]

488

οἱ δοῦλοι Κυρίου), καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τὰ
Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ τρία τοῦ Τριῳδίου Ἰδιόμελα Ἐκ βαΐων καὶ κλάδων,
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Σήμερον
τῆς σωτηρίας ἐκ τρίτου καὶ Ἀπόλυσις. Ταύτῃ τῇ ἑσπέρᾳ ἡ
Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Νυμφίου (δηλ. ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς Μ. Δευτέρας) οὐ
ψάλλεται διὰ τὴν αἰδέσιμον τῆς ἑορτῆς.

    Τῇ Μ. Δευτέρᾳ πρωΐ, ἡ Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Ὄρθρου τῆς ἑορτῆς,
μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου, ψάλλεται ὡς διετάχθη ἐν
περιπτώσει Α΄ § 4, 5.
    Σημ. Ἐν τῇ τραπέζῃ κατάλυσις οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου γίνεται ἂν
συμπέσῃ ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Δευτέρᾳ, Τρίτῃ, Τετάρτῃ καὶ Πέμπτῃ τῆς Μ.
Ἑβδομάδος. Τὸ ἀρχαῖον τοῦ ͵αχπε΄ Τυπικὸν ἐσημείου κατάλυσιν καὶ
ἐν τῇ Μ. Παρασκευῇ καὶ τῷ Μ. Σαββάτῳ, καθότι τότε οὔπω ἦν
διατεταγμένη ἡ τῆς ἑορτῆς μετάθεσις εἰς τὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ Πάσχα·
ἀλλ᾿ ἐπειδὴ ἐὰν ἡ ἑορτὴ συμπέσῃ ἐν Μ. Σαββάτῳ ἢ Μ. Παρασκευῇ
μετατίθεται νῦν εἰς τὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ Πάσχα, διὰ τοῦτο ἐν ταῖς δυσὶ
ταύταις ἡμέραις κατάλυσις οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου οὐ γίνεται.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Ἑσπερινὸς ὡς
διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 18.
    Περὶ τὴν α΄ ὥραν τῆς νυκτὸς (7 μ.μ.) ψάλλεται ἡ τοῦ Ὄρθρου
τοῦ Νυμφίου Ἀκολουθία (Μεγάλη Τρίτη) κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Τριῳδίου
διάταξιν, ὡς καὶ τὸ πρωῒ τῇ Μ. Τρίτῃ ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν
Προηγιασμένων ὡς εἴθισται.

Κ΄.

63.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Μ. Τρίτῃ, τῇ Μ. Δευτέρᾳ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὴν
Στιχολογίαν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου τῆς ἡμέρας, ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι
λιταὶ καὶ λέγομεν Τροπάριον Ἰδοὺ ὁ Νυμφίος ἔρχεται, καὶ Κοντάκιον
Ὁ Ἰακὼβ ὠδύρετο. Μετὰ τὴν εὐχὴν τῆς ς΄ Ὥρας Ἀπόλυσις διὰ τὸ
μὴ τελεῖσθαι Προηγιασμένην Λειτουργίαν.

    Τὸ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὴν Θ΄ Ὥραν, ὁ Μ. Ἑσπερινός, καὶ τὸ πρωὶ
τῇ Μ. Τρίτῃ ὁ Ὄρθρος τῆς ἑορτῆς μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου, ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.
    Τῇ αὐτῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ
Ἑσπερινὸς ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 18· ἀλλὰ μετὰ τὸ Νῦν
ἀπολύεις ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν τοῦ Τριῳδίου, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ

*(Printed Page 488)*

=== LEAF p504 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Nineteen Concl. (§ 62) and Situation Twenty Opening (§ 63) (p. 489)]

489

servants of the Lord”} and the Readings of the Feast {Genesis 28:10-17,
Ezekiel 43:27 - 44:4, Proverbs 9:1-11}. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela
of the Triodion “With laurels and branches,” Glory, Now and ever,
“Today is the announcement of joy.” The Apolytikion “Today marks the
crowning of our salvation” (thrice) and Dismissal. On this evening the
Service of the Nymphios [of the Bridegroom] {i.e., the Matins of Holy
Monday} is not celebrated because of the great reverence due to the Feast.
    On Monday morning, the Matins of the Feast with the Liturgy of
Chrysostom is celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 4 and
5.
    Note: At the refectory, the use of wine and oil is allowed if the Feast
falls on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday of Great {Holy} Week.
The ancient Typikon of 1685 indicated the use of wine and oil on Great
Friday and Great Saturday, because, at that time, the moving of the Feast to
the day of Pascha {Easter} was not prescribed; but now, if the Feast occurs
on Great Friday or Great Saturday, it is moved to the day of Pascha. For this
reason, on these two days, the partaking of wine and oil is not allowed.
    In the evening, the Leave-taking of the Feast is celebrated and the
Vespers is sung as prescribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 18.
    About the 1st Hour of the night {7 pm}, the Orthros of the
Nymphios (Holy Tuesday) is celebrated according to the order of the
Triodion; so also is the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts on Great Tuesday
morning, as is customary.

SITUATION TWENTY

63.    If the Feast occurs on Holy Tuesday, on Holy Monday morning,
after the Reading of Psalter of the day, the Hours are read plainly and we
say the Troparion “Behold, the Bridegroom comes” and the Kontakion
“Jacob mourned the loss of Joseph.” Since we are not celebrating the
Divine Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts, the Dismissal takes place after
the prayer of the 6th Hour.
    In the evening after the 9th Hour, we sing Great Vespers; and on
Holy Tuesday morning the Orthros of the Feast and the Divine Liturgy of
Chrysostom are celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3-5.
    In the evening of this day, the Leave-taking of the Feast and the
Vespers are celebrated as prescribed in Situation Three, Paragraph 18.
However, after “Now Lord,” the Canon of the Triodion is sung, then the

*(Printed Page 489)*

=== LEAF p505 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XX Concl. (§ 63), Situation XXI (§ 64), and Situation XXII Opening (§ 65) (p. 490)]

490

Ἀπολυτίκιον τρίς, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Περὶ τὴν α΄ ὥραν τῆς νυκτὸς (7 μ.μ.) ψάλλεται ἡ τοῦ Ὄρθρου
τοῦ Νυμφίου Ἀκολουθία (Ὄρθρος Μεγάλης Τετάρτης) κατὰ τὴν τοῦ
Τριῳδίου διάταξιν, ὡς καὶ τὸ πρωῒ ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων.

ΚΑ΄.

64.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Μ. Τετάρτῃ, τῇ Μ. Τρίτῃ πρωῒ μετὰ τὴν
Στιχολογίαν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου τῆς ἡμέρας ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι
λιταί, τὸ Τροπάριον Ἰδοὺ ὁ Νυμφίος, καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Τὴν ὥραν
ψυχή, μετὰ δὲ τὴν Θ΄ Ὥραν οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ χῦμα κτλ. ὡς συνήθως καὶ
ἡ Ἀπόλυσις. Ἐν τῷ μικρῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ
Πρὸς Κύριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τῶν Ἀποστίχων
(ἅπερ ἐψάλησαν τὴν προτεραίαν) εἰς ἕξ, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἰδού σοι τὸ
τάλαντον. Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα
τῆς ἡμέρας τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ
καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τῶν Προηγιασμένων, Κοινωνικὸν Γεύσασθε,
Εὐλογήσω τὸν Κύριον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἄνευ Θ΄ ὁ Μ. τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἑσπερινός, καὶ τὸ
πρωὶ τῇ Μ. Τετάρτῃ ὁ Ὄρθρος μετὰ τῆς Λειτουργίας τοῦ
Χρυσοστόμου ψάλλονται ὡς διετάχθησαν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 3-5.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας τῆς Μ. Τετάρτης ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ
ψάλλεται ὁ Ἑσπερινὸς ὡς διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 18, ψαλλομένου
σύναμα, μετὰ τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις, καὶ τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Τριῳδίου.
    Σημειωτέον ὅτι ὡς κατὰ τὴν ἑσπέραν τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Βαΐων
( ἴδε § 62), οὕτω καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς μέχρι τῆς Μ. Τετάρτης ἡμέρας, καθ᾿
ἃς ψάλλεται ὁ Μ. τῆς ἑορτῆς Ἑσπερινός, καταλιμπάνεται ἡ
Ἀκολουθία τοῦ Νυμφίου διὰ τὸ αἰδέσιμον τῆς φαιδρᾶς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ
ἑορτῆς.

ΚΒ΄.

65    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Μ. Πέμπτῃ, τῇ Μ. Τετάρτῃ πρωΐ, μετὰ
τὴν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου τῆς ἡμέρας Στιχολογίαν, ἀναγινώσκονται αἱ Ὧραι
λιταί, ὡς χθές, Τροπάριον Ἰδοὺ ὁ Νυμφίος, καὶ Κοντάκιον Ὑπὲρ τὴν
πόρνην ἀγαθὲ ἀνομήσας, κτλ. Ἐν τῷ μικρῷ Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν

*(Printed Page 490)*

=== LEAF p506 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Twenty Concl. (§ 63), Situation Twenty-One (§ 64), and Situation Twenty-Two Opening (§ 65) (p. 491)]

491

Trisagion, the Apolytikion (thrice) and Dismissal.
    About the 1st Hour of the night {7 pm} the Matins of the Nymphios
[Bridegroom] {Matins of Holy Wednesday} is sung according to the order
of the Triodion, as well as the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified Gifts on Holy
Wednesday morning.

SITUATION TWENTY-ONE

64.    If the Feast occurs on Holy Wednesday, on Holy Tuesday morning,
after the reading of the Psalter of the day, the Hours are read plainly, then
the Troparion “Behold, the Bridegroom [comes]” and the Kontakion
“Soul, mindful of your final hour.” After the 9th Hour, the Beatitudes are
read, etc., as usual, and Dismissal. At Small Vespers, after the Introductory
Psalm and “To the Lord,” at “Lord, I have cried,” we chant the 3 Idiomela
of the Aposticha (which were chanted on the previous day) in six, Glory,
Now and ever, “Soul, consider the talent the Master entrusts to you.”
Entrance with the Gospel, “O Gladsome Light,” the Readings of the day
{Exodus 2:5-10, Job 1:13-22}. Then, “Let my prayer arise” and the Gospel
of the day {Matthew 24:36 - 26:2} and the Liturgy of the Pre-sanctified
Gifts, Communion Hymn “Taste and see,” “I will bless the Lord” and
Dismissal.
    In the evening without the 9th Hour, the Great Vespers of the Feast,
and on Holy Wednesday morning, Matins and the Divine Liturgy of
Chrysostom are celebrated as prescribed in Situation One, Paragraphs 3-5.
    On Holy Wednesday evening, the Leave-taking of the Feast and
Vespers are celebrated together as prescribed in Situation Three, Paragraph
18. After “Lord now let,” we sing the Canon of the Triodion.
    Note that, from the evening of Palm Sunday (see Paragraph 62)
through Great {Holy} Wednesday, when the Great Vespers of the Feast is
celebrated, the Service of the Nymphios [Bridegroom] is omitted because
of the reverence due to the joyful Feast of the Annunciation.

SITUATION TWENTY-TWO

65.    If the Feast occurs on Holy Thursday, on Holy Wednesday morn-
ing, after the reading of the Psalter of the day, the Hours are read plainly,
as yesterday, then the Troparion “Behold, the Bridegroom comes,” and the
Kontakion “Though I have outdone the harlot in sin,” etc. At Small

*(Printed Page 491)*

=== LEAF p507 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XXII Cont. (§§ 65–68 Opening) (p. 492)]

492

Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Κύριον εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ
δ΄ Στιχηρὰ Ἰδιόμελα τῶν Αἴνων τῆς Μ. Πέμπτης Συντρέχει
λοιπόν, καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ γ΄ (Ἰούδας ὁ παράνομος, Ἰούδας ὁ
προδότης δόλιος καὶ Ἰούδας ὁ δοῦλος καὶ δόλιος), Δόξα, Καὶ
νῦν, Γέννημα ἐχιδνῶν. Εἴσοδος μετὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, Φῶς
ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἡμέρας, τὸ Κατευθυνθήτω καὶ
τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Τοῦ Ἰησοῦ γενομένου, καὶ ἡ λοιπὴ Ἀκολουθία
τῶν Προηγιασμένων.

66.    Τὸ ἑσπέρας (τῇ Ἁγίᾳ Τετάρτῃ), ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ
τὸν Προοιμιακόν, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα τὰ γ΄ τῆς ἑορτῆς Προσόμοια
εἰς ς΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀπεστάλη ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν,
τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας, καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς
τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα Τῷ ἕκτῳ μηνί, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Σήμερον
χαρᾶς εὐαγγέλια, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

67.    Τὸ πρωὶ τῆς Μ. Πέμπτης μετὰ τὸ Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός, τὸ
Τρισάγιον, ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς, τὸ Τρισάγιον αὖθις,
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ τρίτου καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος Ἐξηρεύξατο ἡ καρδία
μου, τὰ Καθίσματα μόνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί,
τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Εὐαγγελίζεσθε
ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοή, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τὸ τῆς
Λειτουργίας τῆς ἑορτῆς, ὁ Ν΄ χῦμα, Δόξα, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου,
Καὶ νῦν τὸ αὐτό, ὁ Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον
Εὐαγγελίζεται ὁ Γαβριήλ, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς ς΄· ἀπὸ γ΄
Ὠδῆς μετὰ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ τὸν Οἶκον τοῦ Τριῳδίου, Κάθισμα τοῦ
Τριῳδίου Ὁ λίμνας καὶ πηγάς, καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὁ λόγος τοῦ
Θεοῦ· ἀφ᾿ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῆς ἑορτῆς τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς
ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω
τὸ στόμα μου, καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς, Ἐξαποστειλάρια
Τὸν νυμφῶνά σου βλέπω ἅπαξ, καὶ τὰ δύο τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους, τὸ Ἰδιόμελον τοῦ Τριῳδίου Μηδεὶς ὦ πιστοὶ δίς, καὶ τὰ
γ΄ τῶν Αἴνων Προσόμοια τῆς ἑορτῆς εἰς δ΄, Δόξα, Μυσταγωγῶν
σου Κύριε, Καὶ νῦν, Τὸ ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος μυστήριον, Δοξολογία Μ.
καὶ τὸ Σήμερον τῆς σωτηρίας.

68.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τῆς ἑορτῆς, Εἰσοδικὸν

*(Printed Page 492)*

=== LEAF p508 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Twenty-Two Cont. (§§ 65–68 Opening) (p. 493)]

493

Vespers, after the Introductory Psalm and “To the Lord,” at “Lord, I have
cried,” we chant the 4 Stichira Idiomela of the Praises of Holy Thursday
“The Sanhedrin convenes” and the other 3 {“Judas the lawless,” “Judas
the cunning,” “Judas, servant and deceiver”}, Glory, Now and ever,
“Judas is truly the offspring of asps.” Entrance with the Gospel, “O
Gladsome Light,” and the Readings of the day {Exodus 2:11-23, 18:4, Job
2:1-10}. Then “Let my prayer arise,” and the Gospel “Now when Jesus
was at Bethany” {Matthew 26:6-16}, and the rest of the Liturgy of the Pre-
sanctified Gifts.
66.    In the evening {of Holy Wednesday} at the Great Vespers after the
Introductory Psalm, at “Lord, I have cried” we chant the 3 Prosomia of the
Feast in six, Glory, Now and ever, “The Archangel Gabriel was sent down
from heaven.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light” the Prokimenon of the day,
and the Readings of the Feast {Genesis 28:10-17, Ezekiel 43:27 -44:4,
Proverbs 9:1-11}. At the Aposticha: the 3 Idiomela “In the sixth month,”
Glory, Now and ever, “Today is the announcement of joy.” The Apolytikion
(thrice) and Dismissal.
67.    On Holy Thursday morning after “Blessed is our God,” the
Trisagion, Psalm 50 and the Liti of the Feast, again the Trisagion, the
Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion
(thrice) and the Polyeleos “My heart is overflowing” [Psalm 44 (45)]. The
Kathismata of the Feast only, the Anavathmi, the First Antiphon of Mode
IV, the Prokimenon “Proclaim from day to day.” Then “Let everything
that has breath” and the Liturgy Gospel of the Feast {Luke 1:24-38}, Psalm
50 read, Glory, “Through the intercessions of the Theotokos,” Now and
ever, repeat the same; the Verse “Have mercy on me, O God” and the
Idiomelon “Today Gabriel announces”; the Canon of the Feast in six.
After the 3rd Ode, after the Kontakion of the Triodion, the Kathisma of the
Triodion,2 “He who made the lakes and springs,” and that of the Feast
“The Word of God”; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast,
the Minologion and the Postscript of the Triodion. The Katavasie “I shall
open my mouth” and we sing the 9th Ode of the Feast. Exapostilaria: “I
see Your bridal chamber” (once), and the 2 of the Feast. At the Praises: the
Idiomelon of the Triodion “O you faithful, let none who is uninstructed”
(twice) and the 3 Prosomia of the Feast in 4, Glory, “Instructing Your
disciples in the Mystery,” Now and ever, “The mystery before all time,”
Great Doxology and “Today marks the crowning of our salvation.”
68.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons of the Feast. Entrance Hymn
“Proclaim day by day... Save us,... who was incarnate for our sakes,”

*(Printed Page 493)*

=== LEAF p509 ===
[Original Greek Text: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation XXII Concl. (§ 68) and Situation XXIII Opening (§ 69) (p. 494)]

494

Εὐαγγελίζεσθε ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας . . . σῶσον ἡμᾶς . . . ὁ
δι᾿ ἡμᾶς σαρκωθείς, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ τὸ
Κοντάκιον Τῇ ὑπερμάχῳ, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Μ.
Πέμπτης, καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Χρυσοστόμου 3· ἀντὶ τοῦ
Οἱ τὰ Χερουβίμ, ψάλλεται τὸ Τροπάριον Τοῦ δείπνου σου τοῦ
μυστικοῦ. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Εὐαγγελίζου γῆ . . . Ὡς ἐμψύχῳ
Θεοῦ κιβωτῷ, Κοινωνικὸν Ἐξελέξατο Κύριος τὴν Σιών· ἀντὶ
τοῦ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, Τοῦ δείπνου σου τοῦ μυστικοῦ χῦμα καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τὸ ἑσπέρας ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ καὶ ψάλλεται ὁ Ἑσπερινὸς ὡς
διετάχθη ἐν περιπτώσει Γ΄ § 18.
    Περὶ τὴν α΄ ὥραν τῆς νυκτὸς ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν
Ἁγίων Παθῶν, ὡς διετάττεται ἐν τῷ Τριῳδίῳ.

ΚΓ΄.

69.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῇ Μ. Παρασκευῇ ἢ τῷ Μ. Σαββάτῳ, ἡ
ἑορτὴ μετατίθεται καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία κατ᾿ αὐτὴν τὴν
ἡμέραν τοῦ Πάσχα μετὰ τῆς Ἀναστασίμου Ἀκολουθίας.

Περὶ τῶν αἰτιῶν, δι᾿ ἃς μετατίθεται ἡ ἑορτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ
εἰς τὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ Πάσχα.

    «Ἡ Ἁγία τοῦ Χριστοῦ Μ. Ἐκκλησία ἀπὸ ἑνὸς αἰῶνος καὶ
ἐντεῦθεν, παρὰ Πατριαρχῶν καὶ Ἀρχιερέων ὡς παρελάβομεν, κατιδοῦσα
τὴν διαφωνίαν καὶ σύγχυσιν τὴν συμβαίνουσαν ἀνὰ πάσας τὰς ἐν
πόλεσι καὶ κώμαις ἐκκλησίας μέριμναν καὶ περὶ τῆς τοῦ Εὐαγγελισμοῦ
μεγάλης πανηγύρεως ἀνελάβετο. Καὶ δή, πρὸς παῦσιν τῆς δοκούσης
ἀνωμαλίας, μάλιστα ἐν ταῖς τοῦ ἁπλοῦ λαοῦ ἀκοαῖς τοῦ μὴ κατὰ βάθος
τὰ τοῦ Πνεύματος ἐννοοῦντος, διετάξατο τὴν τῆς ἑορτῆς μετάθεσιν
ἐὰν τύχῃ ἐν ταῖς δυσὶ πενθίμοις ταύταις ἡμέραις [Μ. Παρασκευῇ ἢ
Μ. Σαββάτῳ], εἰς τὴν κυριώνυμον τοῦ Πάσχα ἡμέραν· ἵνα τὰ
χαρμόσυνα τοῖς χαρμοσύνοις συνάδωνται καὶ συμμελῳδῶνται
οἰκονομικῶς ἀποκλείουσα τὴν ἀνάμειξιν τῶν φαιδρῶν μετὰ τῶν
πενθίμων, καὶ ἵνα μὴ ἀσυμφωνία δεικνύηται μεταξὺ τοῦ Σήμερον
κρεμᾶται ἐπὶ ξύλου καὶ τοῦ Σήμερον χαρᾶς Εὐαγγέλια, καὶ τοῦ
Δακρυρρόους θρήνους ἐπὶ σὲ Ἁγνὴ μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ Γαβριὴλ τῇ
Παρθένῳ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Ταῦτα δέ, ὡς εἴρηται, διὰ τὰς ἐν πόλεσι
καὶ κώμαις μόνον ἐκκλησίας, τῶν μοναστηριακῶν Τυπικῶν

*(Printed Page 494)*

=== LEAF p510 ===
[English Facing Translation: March 25: The Annunciation of the Theotokos; Situation Twenty-Two Concl. (§ 68) and Situation Twenty-Three Opening (§ 69) (p. 495)]

495

the Apolytikion of the Feast, and the Kontakion “To the Champion
General,” the Apostolos and Gospel of Holy Thursday, {1 Corinthians
11:23-32, Matthew 26:1-20, John 13:3-17, Matthew 26:21-39, Luke 22:43-
44, Matthew 26:40 -27:2} and there follows the Liturgy of Chrysostom 3;
instead of “We who mystically represent the Cherubim,” we chant the
Troparion “Of Your mystical supper” is sung. At “Especially,” we sing “O
Earth, announce... As a live ark of God,” Communion Hymn “God has
chosen Zion”; instead of “We have seen the [true] Light,” we chant “Of
Your mystical supper” in recitative style, and Dismissal.
    In the evening the Leave-taking of the Feast is celebrated, and Vespers
is sung as prescribed in Situation 3, Paragraph 18.
    About the first hour of the night, the Service of the Holy Passions is
celebrated, as prescribed in the Triodion.

SITUATION TWENTY-THREE

69.    If the Feast occurs on Great Friday or Great Saturday, the Feast is
moved to and sung on Easter Sunday together with the Service of the
Resurrection.

Concerning the reasons for which the Feast of the Annunciation is
moved to the day of Pascha (Easter).

    “The Holy and Great Church of Christ, which we have received
from Patriarchs and Archbishops from a century ago to the present, having
noted the disssent and confusion taking place in all the churches of the cities
and villages, became concerned especially about the great celebration of the
Feast of the Annunciation. And what is more, in order to quiet down the
impending possible disturbance on this matter— especially in the percep-
tion of simple people who do not understand the things of the Spirit with any
depth — the Church ordained that, if the Feast falls on these two mournful
days [Holy Friday or Holy Saturday], it should be moved to the supreme day
of Pascha [Easter] itself. In order that the joyous things are sung and
melodized with the joyous, the Church by economy prevented the mixing
of the cheerful with the mournful, in order also that no confusing dissonance
is brought between “Today is hung on the wood” and “Today is the
announcement of joy,” and between “Tears of lamentation the pure
Virgin shed over You” and “Gabriel brought the happy tidings to the
Virgin from Heaven.” These observations pertain only to the churches of

*(Printed Page 495)*
