=== LEAF p311 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 1 Continued: Matins Concluded & Liturgy Antiphons 1 & 2 (p. 296)]

296

        Δόξα, Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τῆς Τρισυποστάτου, καὶ
ἀδιαιρέτου, Θεότητος τὸ κράτος.
        Καὶ νῦν, Μεγάλυνον ψυχή μου, τὴν λυτρωσαμένην,
ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῆς κατάρας.
*[Σημ. Τὰ ἄνωθεν Μεγαλυνάρια ἐντὸς παρενθέσεως καὶ μὲ ἀστερίσκους εὑρίσκονται
εἰς τὸ Μηναῖον εἰς τὴν θ' Ὠδὴν (ἐκ. Φῶς, 1960, καὶ ἐκδ. Ἀποστολικὴ Διακονία 1960).
Δὲν εὑρίσκονται εἰς τὸ Τυπικὸν ἢ εἰς τὰς τυπικὰς ὁδηγείας τοῦ Μηναίου.]

    Ἐξαποστειλάρια τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς
Αἴνους, τὰ Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄, Δόξα, Ἐξεχύθη ἡ χάρις ἐν χείλεσί σου,
Καὶ νῦν, Συγκαταβαίνων ὁ Σωτήρ, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον
Μορφὴν ἀναλλοιώτως καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα.

                     ᾿Αντίφωνον α'

    ᾿Αλαλάξατε τῷ Κυρίῳ πᾶσα ἡ
γῆ.
    Ψάλατε δὴ τῷ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ.
    Διηγήσασθε πάντα τὰ θαυμάσια
αὐτοῦ.
    Εἴπατε τῷ Θεῷ· ὡς φοβερὰ
τὰ ἔργα σου.
(Δόξα . . . ᾿Αμήν.)
                                            | Ταῖς πρεσβείαις
                                            | τῆς θεοτόκου κτλ.

                     ᾿Αντίφωνον β'.

    Εὐφραινέσθωσαν οἱ οὐρανοὶ καὶ
ἀγαλλιάσθω ἡ γῆ.
    ῎Ασατε τῷ Κυρίῳ ᾆσμα καινόν.
    Ἐκ Σιὼν ἡ εὐπρέπεια τῆς
ὡραιότητος αὐτοῦ.
    Ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ
καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ, πάντα ὅσα ἠθέλησεν
ἐποίησεν.
                                            | Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ
                                            | Θεοῦ, ὁ σαρκὶ
                                            | περιτμηθεὶς
                                            | κτλ.
            (Δόξα . . . Καὶ νῦν. Ὁ μονογενὴς Υἱός . . .

*(Printed Page 296)*

=== LEAF p312 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 1 Continued: Matins Concluded & Liturgy Antiphons 1 & 2 (p. 297)]

297

        Glory, Magnify, O my soul, the power of the Godhead in three
persons and undivided.
        Now and ever, Magnify, O my soul, Her who has delivered us from
the curse.
*[Note: The Megalynaria above, enclosed in brackets and marked with an asterisk, are those
that are found in the Mineon at the 9th Ode (ed. Fos, 1960 and ed. Apostoliki Diakonia, 1991),
but are not mentioned in the Typikon or in the reprint of the Rubrics found in the Mineon.]

    Exapostilaria of the Saint and of the Feast. At the Praises: the 4
Prosomia, Glory, “Grace poured forth from your lips,” Now and ever, “The
Savior coming down,” Great Doxology, the Apolytikion “The human form
without change,” and Dismissal.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons:

                    FIRST ANTIPHON

    Make a joyful shout to God all the
earth! [65:1 LXX]
    Sing out the Glory of his name.
[65:2 LXX]                                  | Through the
    I will tell of all Your marvelous        | intercessions of
works. [9:1 LXX]                            | the Theotokos,
    Say to God: “How awesome are            | Savior, save us.
your deeds!” [65:3a LXX]
{Glory, to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Now and ever, and
unto ages of ages. Amen.}

                    SECOND ANTIPHON

    Let the heavens rejoice, and let
the earth be glad. [95:11 LXX]
    O sing to the Lord a new song!          | Save us, O Son of
[97:1 LXX]                                  | God, who was
    Out of Zion, the perfection of          | circumcised in the
his beauty. [49:2 LXX]                      | flesh...
    Our God is in heaven; He does
whatever he pleases. [113:11 LXX]

    [Glory, to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Both Now
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
Only-begotten Son and Word of God ...]

*(Printed Page 297)*

=== LEAF p313 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 1 Continued: Liturgy Concluded & Feast on Sunday (p. 298)]

298
                     ᾿Αντίφωνον γ'.

    Τὰ ἐλέη σου, Κύριε, εἰς τὸν
αἰῶνα ᾄσομαι.
    ᾿Αναγγελῶ τὴν ἀλήθειάν σου              | Μορφὴν
ἐν τῷ στόματί μου.                          | ἀναλλοιώτως κτλ.
    Ἠγάπησας δικαιοσύνην καὶ
ἐμίσησας ἀνομίαν.

    Εἰσοδικὸν Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ σαρκὶ περιτμηθείς· τὸ
᾿Απολυτίκιον Μορφὴν ἀναλλοιώτως, τοῦ Ἁγίου Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν
καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Ὁ τῶν ὅλων Κύριος περιτομὴν
ὑπομένει (Ζήτει ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος)· τὸ Τρισάγιον.
᾿Απόστολος ᾿Αδελφοὶ μή τις ὑμᾶς ἔσται ὁ συλαγωγῶν, καὶ
Εὐαγγέλιον Ὑπέστρεψαν οἱ Ποιμένες δοξάζοντες καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ
Λειτουργία τοῦ Μεγάλου Βασιλείου· εἰς τὰ Δίπτυχα ψάλλεται τὸ
Μεγαλυνάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου.
    Τὸν οὐρανοφάντορα τοῦ Χριστοῦ μύστην τοῦ Δεσπότου, τὸν
φωστῆρα τὸν φαεινόν, τὸν ἐκ Καισαρείας καὶ Καππαδόκων χώρας,
Βασίλειον τὸν μέγαν πάντες τιμήσωμεν.
    Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον (ἐν οἵᾳ ἂν ἡμέρᾳ τύχῃ ἑορτή)·
ἀντὶ τοῦ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, τὸ Μορφὴν ἀναλλοιώτως καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ ἐν Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ
τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα
ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄, τῆς ἑορτῆς τὰ δύο Ἰδιόμελα εἰς
γ΄ καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου γ΄, Δόξα τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον
τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ
᾿Αναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα
τοῦ Ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν, Οὐκ ἐπῃσχύνθη, ᾿Απολυτίκια, τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον,
τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Ἁγίου, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Οὐκ ἐπῃσχύνθη καὶ τὰ
Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν. Εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Μορφὴν
ἀναλλοιώτως καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ ᾿Απολυτίκια
ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Εἰς τὰ
Καθίσματα, ἀνὰ ἓν ᾿Αναστάσιμον, τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς ἐν
τῇ α΄ καὶ β΄ στιχολογίᾳ· ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ τὰ τοῦ Μηναίου ὡς ἔχουσιν,
εἶτα τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος, ὁ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τοῦ

*(Printed Page 298)*

=== LEAF p314 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 1 Continued: Liturgy Concluded & Feast on Sunday (p. 299)]

299

                    THIRD ANTIPHON

    I will sing of the mercies of the
Lord forever. [88:1a LXX]
    With my mouth I will make known         | The human
Your faithfulness to all generations.[88:1b LXX] | form without
    You love righteousness and hate         | change...
wickedness. [44:8 LXX]

    Entrance Hymn: “O come let us worship ... who was circumcised
in the flesh.” The Apolytikion “The human form without change,” of the
Saint “To all the earth your word has gone out,” and of the Saint of the
Church. The Kontakion “The Lord of All endures Circumcision (see after
the third Ode of the Canon). The Trisagios Hymn, Apostolos “Brethren,
beware lest anyone cheat you” and Gospel “The shepherds returned
glorifying,” and then the Liturgy of Basil the Great; at the Diptychs we sing
the Megalynarion of the Saint:
    “Let us all extol the great Basil, revealer of heavenly things,
initiate of the Master, the star shining from Caesarea and the town of
Capadocia, honoring and magnifying him.”
    Communion Hymn “Praise the Lord” (regardless of what day it is);
instead of “We have seen the [true] light,” we sing “The human form
without change” and Dismissal.
4.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers on Saturday evening
following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we
sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and the 2 Idiomela of the Feast repeating
the first, and 3 Prosomia of the Saint. Glory of the Saint, Now and ever the
first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon
and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the
Saint, Now and ever, “The all-good God was not ashamed.” The Apolytikia:
of the Resurrection, of the Saint, of the Feast, and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Liti
of the Saint, Glory, Now and ever, “The all-good God was not ashamed”
and the Triadic “It is meet.” Then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “The
human form without change” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”:
the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. At the
Kathismata, one Resurrection Kathisma, one of the Saint, and one of the
Feast at the first and second Stasis [Stichologia] [Stichologie]. At the 3rd
Stasis those of the Mineon, then the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi
of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection, of the

*(Printed Page 299)*

=== LEAF p315 ===
[Original Greek Text: January 1 Sunday Concluded & Sunday before Theophany: Situation One (p. 300)]

300

Ἁγίου ἀνὰ δ΄· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ
Οἴκου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς· ἀφ’ ς΄
Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῆς ἡμέρας,
αἱ Καταβασίαι διπλαῖ καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου.
Εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ Ὠδὴ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ἡ τοῦ ἁγίου μετὰ τῶν
Μεγαλυναρίων καὶ αἱ β΄ Καταβασίαι τῆς Θ΄. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ
᾿Αναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ ἁγίου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους,
᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς ἑορτῆς δ΄, Δόξα τοῦ ἁγίου, Καὶ νῦν,
Συγκαταβαίνων ὁ Σωτήρ, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον
σωτηρία.

6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ ᾿Αντίφωνα· εἰς τὸ β΄ ᾿Αντίφωνον Ὁ
σαρκὶ περιτμηθείς· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, Δεῦτε προσκυνήσωμεν . . . ὁ
ἀναστὰς ἐκ νεκρῶν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ
τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου, [τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ] Κοντάκιον Ὁ τῶν ὅλων Κύριος
(ζήτει ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς), ᾿Απόστολος τοῦ Ἁγίου καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον
Ὑπέστρεψαν οἱ ποιμένες καὶ καθεξῆς ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μεγάλου
Βασιλείου. Εἰς τὰ Δίπτυχα ψάλλεται τὸ Μεγαλυνάριον τοῦ Ἁγίου
(ὅρα ὄπισθεν § 3). Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, τὸ ᾿Απολυτίκιον Μορφὴν
ἀναλλοιώτως καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

              Κυριακὴ πρὸ τῶν Φώτων.

                   ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
                        Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Κυριακὴ πρὸ τῶν Φώτων τῇ Β΄, Γ΄, ἢ Δ΄ τοῦ μηνός,
ἡ ᾿Ακολουθία ψάλλεται ὡς ἐφεξῆς· Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν
Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν
᾿Αναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ Προεόρτια δ΄ Προεόρτια ᾄσματα (ζήτει τῇ Β΄ τοῦ
μηνός)· Δόξα, Ἔρχετε πρὸς Ἰορδάνην, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ
ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα,
τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἰωάννη Βαπτιστὰ (ζήτει τῇ
Β΄ τοῦ μηνός). ᾿Απολυτίκια τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον, τὸ Προεόρτιον
Ἑτοιμάζου Ζαβουλὼν καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
2.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν. Εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
᾿Απολυτίκιον Ἑτοιμάζου Ζαβουλὼν καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον ἅπαξ.

*(Printed Page 300)*

=== LEAF p316 ===
[English Facing Translation: January 1 Sunday Concluded & Sunday before Theophany: Situation One (p. 301)]

301

Feast and of the Saint with four hymns each. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, then the Kathisma of the Saint and
that of the Feast; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, and
the Minologion of the day. The two (double) Katavasie, and the entire order
of the Morning Gospel. Then the 9th Ode of the Feast with that of the Saint
with their Megalynaria and the 2 (double) Katavasie of the 9th Ode.
Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, that of the Saint and that of the Feast. At
the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Feast, Glory of the Saint,
Now and ever, “The Savior coming down,” Great Doxology, and “Today
salvation.”
6.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons; in the second Antiphon “Who was
circumcised in the flesh”; at the Entrance “O come let us worship ... who
is risen from the dead.” The Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast,
that of the Saint, [that of the Saint of the Church], the Kontakion “The Lord
of All endures Circumcision (after the third Ode of the Canon). Apostolos
of the Saint and Gospel “The shepherds returned glorifying,” and then the
Liturgy of Basil the Great; at the Diptychs we sing the Megalynarion of the
Saint (see above Paragraph 3). Communion Hymn “Praise [the Lord],” the
Apolytikion “The human form without change,” and Dismissal.

                Sunday before Epiphany

                    SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Sunday before Epiphany occurs on the 2nd, 3rd, or 4th of the
month, the Service is sung as follows: on Saturday evening following the
Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira
of the Resurrection, and the 4 of the Pre-feast “Pre-festal songs” (see
January 2) Glory, “He comes toward the Jordan,” Now and ever the first
Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon.
At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “O John
the Baptizer” (see in January 2 the Glory of Matins). Apolytikia: of the
Resurrection, of the Pre-feast “Make ready, O Zabulon,” and Dismissal.
2.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet.” Then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Make ready, O
Zabulon” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection
Apolytikion twice and that of the Pre-feast once, then the Psalter and the
Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the

*(Printed Page 301)*

=== LEAF p317 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday before Theophany: Situation One Concluded & Situation Two (p. 302)]

302

εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ
σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος τῆς ἡμέρας.
᾿Απὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα Ἀόρατε Θεὲ ἅπαξ, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ
Οἶκος τὰ ᾿Αναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας·
αἱ Καταβασίαι Βυθοῦ ἀνεκάλυψε πυθμένα καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ
Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν.
Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Πῶς ῥεῖθρά σε
ποτάμια (ζήτει τῇ Β΄ τοῦ μηνός). Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄
καὶ δ΄ Προεόρτια Αἱ Ἀγγελικαὶ προπορεύεσθε δυνάμεις. Δόξα τὸ
Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη. Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ
Σήμερον σωτηρία.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ προεορτίου Κανόνος δ΄· μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἑτοιμάζου
Ζαβουλὼν καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις
σήμερον, ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῶν Φώτων.
Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς
καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.

                        Β΄.

4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ Κυριακὴ πρὸ τῶν Φώτων τῇ Παραμονῇ τῆς ἑορτῆς
(τῇ Ε΄ τοῦ μηνός), τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ
τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ᾿Αναστάσιμα ς΄ καὶ
Προεόρτια α΄ Προεόρτια ᾄσματα. Δόξα, Ἔρχετε πρὸς Ἰορδάνην, Καὶ
νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρὸν καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον.
Εἰς τὰ ᾿Απόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἐν
Ἰορδάνῃ ποταμῷ (ζήτει τῇ Γ΄ τοῦ μηνός), ᾿Απολυτίκια τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον,
τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἀπεστρέφετό ποτε καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανὼν καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν. Εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ
᾿Απολυτίκιον Ἀπεστρέφετό ποτε καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς
Κύριος, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον δὶς καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον ἅπαξ,
εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ
σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ ᾿Αναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ
Προκείμενον. Κανόνες, ὁ ᾿Αναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ Προεόρτιος Χριστὸς
μολεῖ πρὸς τὸ βάπτισμα (ζήτει τῇ Ε΄ τοῦ μηνὸς) μετὰ Στίχου Δόξα
σοι ὁ Θεός· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον καὶ ὁ Οἶκος,

*(Printed Page 302)*

=== LEAF p318 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday before Theophany: Situation One Concluded & Situation Two (p. 303)]

303

Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the
Resurrection and of the Pre-feast of that day. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kathisma “Invisible God” once (see January 2); after the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection and the Minologion of the Saints of
the day. The Katavasie “He discovered the bottom of the depth of the sea,”
and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then “More honorable.”
Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection and of the Pre-feast “How did the waters
of the river” (see January 2). At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4
of the Pre-feast “Proceed, O angelic powers.” Glory the Eothinon, Now and
ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology, and “Today salvation.”
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns
from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance, the
Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Pre-feast “Make ready, O Zabulon,”
and that of the Saint of the Church. Kontakion “Today has the Lord
appeared on the waters of Jordan.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday
before Epiphany. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise
[the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

                    SITUATION TWO

4.    If the Sunday before Epiphany occurs on the Eve of the Feast (the
5th of the month), on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm
and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrec-
tion, and the 4 of the Pre-feast “Pre-festal songs,” Glory, “Christ comes
toward the Jordan,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode.
Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” and the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the
Resurrection Stichira, Glory, Now and ever, “The river Jordan turned
back” (see January 3). Apolytikia of the Resurrection, of the Pre-feast “In
the river Jordan,” and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the
Triadic “It is meet.” Then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “The river Jordan
turned back” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Resurrection
Apolytikion twice and the Pre-feast once, then the Psalter and the Amomos.
The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi of the
Mode, the Anavathmi and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection
and of the Pre-feast “Christ comes to baptism” (see the 5th of the month),
with the Verse “Glory to You, O God.” After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection

*(Printed Page 303)*

=== LEAF p319 ===
[Original Greek Text: Sunday before Theophany: Situation Two Concluded & Theophany Situation One (p. 304)]

304

εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Ὁ Μέγας ὑετός [ὅρα 5 Ἰανουαρίου], ἀφ’ ς΄
Κοντάκιον ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις σήμερον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον
τῶν Ἁγίων τῆς ἡμέρας· αἱ Καταβασίαι Βυθοῦ ἀνεκάλυψε
πυθμένα καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου. Εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ ᾿Αναστάσιμον
καὶ τὸ Προεόρτιον Πῶς ῥεῖθρά σε ποτάμια (ζήτει τῇ Β΄ τοῦ
μηνός). Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ᾿Αναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ δ΄ Προεόρτια Ἰδοὺ
ὁ Βασιλεύς. Δόξα, Ἰωάννη Βαπτιστά, Καὶ νῦν,
Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ προεορτίου Κανόνος δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον ᾿Απολυτίκιον, τὸ Προεόρτιον Ἀπεστρέφετό
ποτε, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις
σήμερον. ᾿Απόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς πρὸ τῶν Φώτων.
Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς.

    Μετὰ τὸ Εἴη τὸ Ὄνομα Κυρίου, ψάλλονται τὰ Ἰδιόμελα Φωνὴ
Κυρίου ἐπὶ τῶν ὑδάτων κτλ. καὶ τελεῖται ὁ Ἁγιασμός, ὡς εἴθισται,
κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ Μηναίῳ διάταξιν· ᾿Απολυτίκιον Ἐν Ἰορδάνῃ καὶ
Κοντάκιον Ἐν τοῖς ῥείθροις σήμερον· μετὰ τὸ τέλος τοῦ Ἁγιασμοῦ,
ἁγιαζομένων τῶν Χριστιανῶν, ὁ β΄ Χορὸς ψάλλει τὸ Ἰδιόμελον
᾿Ανυμνήσωμεν οἱ πιστοὶ καὶ ᾿Απόλυσις. Ἐν τῇ τραπέζῃ
κατάλυσις οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου.

Τῇ ς΄.    Τὰ ἅγια Θεοφάνεια τοῦ Κυρίου καὶ Θεοῦ καὶ
Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.

                   ΠΕΡΙΠΤΩΣΕΙΣ
                        Α΄.

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ ἑορτὴ τῶν Θεοφανείων ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Παρασκευῇ, τῇ
Πέμπτῃ πρωΐ, μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Ὄρθρου ἐνδιάτακτον ᾿Ακολουθίαν,
ψάλλονται αἱ Μ. Ὧραι κατὰ τὴν τάξιν τῆς Παραμονῆς τῶν
Χριστουγέννων (Ὅρα ἐκεῖ τὴν διάταξιν ἐν περιπτώσει Α΄ § 2). Ὁ δὲ
Μ. Ἑσπερινὸς καὶ ἡ Λειτουργία τοῦ Μ. Βασιλείου μετὰ τοῦ ἐν τῷ
τέλει τῆς Λειτουργίας Ἁγιασμοῦ ψάλλονται ὡς ἑξῆς·

*(Printed Page 304)*

=== LEAF p320 ===
[English Facing Translation: Sunday before Theophany: Situation Two Concluded & Theophany Situation One (p. 305)]

305

Kontakion and the Ikos, the Kathisma “The mighty rain” {see January 5};
after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion “Today has the Lord appeared on the
waters of Jordan.” the Ikos and the Minologion of the Saints of the day; the
Katavasie “He discovered the bottom of the depth of the sea,” and the entire
order of the Morning Gospel; then “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the
Resurrection and the Pre-feast “How did the waters of the river” (see
January 2). At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Pre-feast
“Behold the King.” Glory, “O John the Baptist,” Now and ever, “Most
blessed,” Great Doxology, and “Today salvation.”
6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns
from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Pre-feast. After the Entrance, the
Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Pre-feast “The river Jordan turned
back,” and that of the Saint of the Church. Kontakion “Today has the Lord
appeared on the waters of Jordan.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday
before Epiphany. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise
[the Lord],” “We have seen the [true] light.”
    After “Blessed be the Name,” the Idiomela “The voice of the Lord
upon the waters” etc. and the Service of the Blessing of the Waters is
performed as prescribed in the Mineon. Apolytikion “When You, O Lord,
were baptized in Jordan” and Kontakion “Today has the Lord appeared
on the waters of Jordan”; after the end of the Blessing of the Waters
Service, while the faithful are blessed, the second Choir sings the Idiomelon
“You faithful, let us praise,” and Dismissal. At table, wine and olive oil are
allowed.

The 6th.    Feast of the Theophany of our Lord and God and
Savior Jesus Christ.

                    SITUATION ONE

1.    If the Feast of the Theophany occurs on a Friday, on Thursday
morning, following the prescribed Service of Matins, are sung the Great
Hours according to the order of the Eve of Christmas (see the order there,
in Situation One, Paragraph 2). The Great Vespers and the Liturgy of Basil
the Great with the Blessing of Water at the conclusion of the Liturgy are sung
according to the following order:

*(Printed Page 305)*
