=== LEAF p201 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 24: Theotokos of Kythera and St. Thecla Concl. (p. 186)]

186

Θεοτόκου Λαοὶ νῦν κροτήσωμεν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανὼν καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τῆς Θεοτόκου, τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον (ἀντὶ τῶν Θεοτοκίων) καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τῆς Θεοτόκου, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τῆς Θεοτόκου, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς Κάθισμα τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τῆς Θεοτόκου, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου, εἶτα Στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ τῆς Θεοτόκου. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῆς Θεοτόκου δ΄, Δόξα τὸ Ἑωθινόν, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῆς Θεοτόκου. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Θεοτόκου, τῆς Ἁγίας, τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος τῆς Ἁγίας καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς, Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Εἰ τύχοι δὲ ἡ ΚΔ΄ ἐν ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ, ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Ἁγίας μετὰ τῆς Ἀκολουθίας τῆς Θεοτόκου, ἥτις προηγεῖται. Ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς Θεοτόκου τετύπωται ἐν ἰδιαιτέρᾳ φυλλάδι.

    Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς ἁγίας Θέκλης συντεθὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀοιδίμου Πατριάρχου Κωνσταντινουπόλεως Κυρίλλου ἐν ἔτει ,αωιγ΄.

Ἦχος γ΄.

    Θείου κήρυκος διδασκαλίας, πόθῳ Κτίστου σου ἀναφλεχθεῖσα, τῶν γηηρῶν ὡς ρεόντων ἠλόγησας καὶ σεαυτὴν ἱερὸν καλλιέρημα τῷ Θεῷ δοῦσα, ποινῶν κατετόλμησας, Θέκλα ἔνδοξε, Παύλου τοῦ θείου συνέκδημε, τὸν σὸν νυμφίον Χριστὸν ἱκέτευε, δωρήσασθαι ἡμῖν τὸ μέγα ἔλεος.
    Ἕτερον Ἀπολυτίκιον τῆς Ἁγίας, εὑρεθὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀοιδίμου Πατριάρχου Κωνσταντινουπόλεως Κυρίου Κωνσταντίου τοῦ Βυζαντίου ἐν μεμβράναις γεγραμμένον, ἐν ἔτει ,αωλβ΄.

*(Printed Page 186)*

=== LEAF p202 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 24: Theotokos of Kythera and St. Thecla Concl. (p. 187)]

187

“People, let us now make noise,” and Dismissal.
2.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Liti of the Theotokos, the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Theotokos and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata and the one of the Theotokos {in place of the Theotokia of the Paraklitiki}, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Theotokos. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma of the Saint and the Theotokos; after the 6th Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel, then “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saint and of the Theotokos. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Theotokos, Glory the Eothinon, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika, and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Theotokos. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Theotokos, that of the Saint, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Protection of Christians.” Apostolos of the Saint and Gospel of the Sunday. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
    If the 24th occurs on any other day [i.e. a weekday], the Service of the Saint is sung together with the Service of the Theotokos, which takes precedence here (see Festal Precedence in the Glossary). The Service of the Theotokos has been printed in a separate booklet.

    Apolytikion of Saint Thekla, composed by the late Patriarch of Constantinople Cyril [the 6th] in 1813

Mode III

    Inflamed by desire for your Creator through the teaching of a divine preacher, you ignored the earthly things as transitory; and offering yourself to God as an auspicious sacrifice, you defied all punishments. Glorious Thekla, fellow-traveller of the divine Paul [the Apostle], beseech your Bridegroom Christ to grant to us the great mercy.
    Another Apolytikion of the Saint, written on a membrane, was found by the late Patriarch of Constantinople Constantios, the Byzantine, in 1832.

*(Printed Page 187)*

=== LEAF p203 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 24: St. Thecla Concl. / September 26: St. John the Theologian (p. 188)]

188

Ἦχος β΄.

    Ὡς τῷ Παύλῳ μαθητευθεῖσα Πανεύφημε, καὶ τῇ πίστει στηριχθεῖσα Πέτρου θεόσοφε, πρωτομάρτυς ἀνεδείχθης καὶ πρώταθλος ἐν γυναιξίν, ἐπέβης τῇ φλογὶ ὡς ἐν λειμῶνι εὐθαλεῖ· θῆρες καὶ ταῦροι ἔφριξάν σε ὁπλισθεῖσαν τῷ Σταυρῷ, πρέσβευε Χριστῷ τῷ Θεῷ, Ἀποστόλων, Θέκλα, συνέκδημε, σωθῆναι τὰς ψυχὰς ἡμῶν.

Τῇ Κς΄.    Ἡ μετάστασις τοῦ ἁγίου ἐνδόξου Ἀποστόλου καὶ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Ἰωάννου τοῦ Θεολόγου.

1.    Ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὴν α΄ Στάσιν τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια Ὁ θεατὴς τῶν ἀρρήτων εἰς ς΄. Δόξα Τὸν Υἱὸν τῆς βροντῆς, Καὶ νῦν Παρῆλθεν ἡ σκιά, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα (καθ’ ἅ ἡμεῖς ἱστάμεθα, ὁ δὲ Διάκονος ἐκφωνεῖ Πρόσχωμεν, Σοφία, Πρόσχωμεν). Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ Προσόμοια, Δόξα Ἀπόστολε Χριστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτόκε σὺ εἶ ἡ ἄμπελος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπόστολε Χριστῷ τῷ Θεῷ· (Δόξα,) Καὶ νῦν Πάντα ὑπὲρ ἔννοιαν, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ Ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον δίς, τὸ Θεοτοκίον, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου, τὸ Προκείμενον Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ ΙΑ΄ Ἑωθινὸν Εὐαγγέλιον, ὁ Ν΄ Ψαλμὸς χῦμα, Δόξα Ταῖς τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, Καὶ νῦν Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, Στίχος Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεός, καὶ τὸ ἰδιόμελον Θεολόγε Παρθένε, ὁ Κανὼν τῆς Θεοτόκου καὶ ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, ἀφ’ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου, εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον καὶ τὸ Σταυροθεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄. Δόξα Εὐαγγελιστὰ Ἰωάννη, Καὶ νῦν Δέσποινα πρόσδεξαι, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικά, οἱ Μακαρισμοί, Τροπάρια ἐκ

*(Printed Page 188)*

=== LEAF p204 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 24: St. Thecla Concl. / September 26: St. John the Theologian (p. 189)]

189

Mode II

    Taught by Paul, O all-praiseworthy one and supported by the faith of Peter, O God-wise one, you were shown as supreme martyr and champion among women; you traversed over the flame as over a blooming meadow; bulls and wild beasts were horror-stricken by you being armed with the Cross. Intercede with Christ God, Thekla, fellow-traveller of the Apostles, to save our souls.

The 26th.    The Translation to Heaven of the holy glorious Apostle and Evangelist John the Theologian.

1.    In Vespers, following the Introductory Psalm and the 1st Stasis of the Psalter at “Lord, I have cried” we sing the 3 Prosomia of the Saint “As a beholder of revelations beyond speech” in 6 [by repeating each of the 3], Glory, “The Son of Thunder,” Now and ever, “The shadow of the law passed.” Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings (at which we stand, as the Deacon exclaims “Let us be attentive. Wisdom. Let us be attentive.” At the Aposticha: the Prosomia, Glory, “Apostle of Christ,” Now and ever, “Theotokos, you are the vine”; the Apolytikion “Apostle beloved of Christ God,” {Glory,} Now and ever, “All your mysteries surpass understanding,” and Dismissal.
2.    In Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikion twice, the Theotokion, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos, the Kathismata in order, the Anavathmi, the 1st Antiphon of the 4th Mode, the Prokimenon “To all the world.” Then “Let everything that breathes” and the 11th Morning Gospel, Psalm 50 (read), Glory, “By the intercessions of the Apostle,” Now and ever, “By the intercessions of the Theotokos,” the Verse “Have mercy on me O God” and the Idiomelon “Virgin Theologian.” The Canons of the Theotokos and of the Evangelist. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos and the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” then we chant “More honorable”; the Exapostilarion [of the Saint] and the one to the Cross and the Theotokos [the stavrotheotokion]. At the Praises: the 4 Prosomia, Glory, “O John the Evangelist,” Now and ever, “O Lady, accept,” Great Doxology and the Apolytikion.
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika, the Beatitudes and the hymns from the

*(Printed Page 189)*

=== LEAF p205 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — September 26: St. John the Theologian Concl. (p. 190)]

190

τῆς γ΄ καὶ ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ· μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ Φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
4.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ ς΄. Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Καὶ νῦν Ὁ Ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
5.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς Κανὼν καὶ ἡ Λιτὴ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀπόστολε Χριστῷ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα καὶ ἀνὰ ἓν τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ μετὰ τοῦ Θεοτοκίου, ἐν δὲ τῇ γ΄ Στιχολογίᾳ τὰ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον, Κανόνες, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον, ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον· αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ δ΄. Δόξα Εὐαγγελιστὰ Ἰωάννη, Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη, Δοξολογία Μεγάλη καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
6.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ δ΄. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τοῦ ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν χριστιανῶν, Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

*(Printed Page 190)*

=== LEAF p206 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — September 26: St. John the Theologian Concl. (p. 191)]

191

3rd and 6th Ode of the Canon of the Evangelist. After the Entrance, the Apolytikion of the Evangelist, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians”; the Apostolos and Gospel. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
4.    If the Feast occurs on Sunday, in Vespers, on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 Prosomia Hymns of the Evangelist, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “My creator and redeemer.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Evangelist, the Theotokion, and Dismissal.
5.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon and the Liti of the Evangelist, the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “Apostle beloved of Christ God” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Resurrection Kathismata and one of the Evangelist [from the 1st and 2nd Stichologie] with the Theotokion, in the 3rd Stichologia those of the Evangelist and the Theotokion; the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Evangelist. After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos (read), and the Kathisma of the Evangelist and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Evangelist and the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Evangelist and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Evangelist, Glory, “O John the Evangelist,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
6.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Evangelist. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Evangelist, that of the Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion “Protection of all Christians.” Apostolos and Gospel of the Evangelist. At “Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “To all the earth,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.

*(Printed Page 191)*

=== LEAF p207 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — October: Fathers of the 7th Ecumenical Council (p. 192)]

192

ΜΗΝ ΟΚΤΩΒΡΙΟΣ

Ἀκολουθία τῶν ἁγίων Πατέρων τῆς Ζ΄ Οἰκουμενικῆς Συνόδου

(Σημ. Κατὰ τὴν ια΄ τοῦ παρόντος μηνός, εἰ τύχοι ἐν Κυριακῇ ἢ τῇ πρώτῃ μετ’ αὐτὴν ἐρχομένῃ Κυριακῇ, ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων τῆς Ζ΄ Οἰκουμενικῆς Συνόδου, κατὰ τὴν ἐφεξῆς διάταξιν).
1.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων ς΄. Δόξα Τὰς μυστικὰς σήμερον, Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου. Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Τὴν ἐτήσιον μνήμην σήμερον, Καὶ νῦν Νεῦσον παρακλήσεσι, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Ἁγίων, τὸ Θεοτοκίον καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
2.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, εἶτα Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων Ἀποστολικῶν παραδόσεων, Καὶ νῦν Θεοτοκίον Προσόμοιον, Θεοτόκε ἡ προστασία· καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν· εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον, Ὑπερδεδοξασμένος εἶ καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος. Τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα κατὰ σειράν, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, καὶ ὁ τῶν Ἁγίων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Κοντάκιον μετὰ τοῦ Οἴκου χῦμα, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα τῶν Ἁγίων Φωστῆρες ὑπέρλαμπροι, Καὶ νῦν Ταχὺ δέξαι Δέσποινα. Ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τῶν Πατέρων. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα Στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τῶν Ἁγίων, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα δ΄ καὶ τῶν Ἁγίων δ΄. Δόξα τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων ὁ χορὸς Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη. Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον σωτηρία.
3.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου εἰς δ΄, καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Ἁγίων. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τῶν Ἁγίων καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ. Κοντάκιον Προστασία τῶν Χριστιανῶν· ὁ Ἀπόστολος Τέκνον Τίτε, πιστὸς ὁ λόγος, καὶ τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον Ἐξῆλθεν ὁ σπείρων τοῦ

*(Printed Page 192)*

=== LEAF p208 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — October: Fathers of the 7th Ecumenical Council (p. 193)]

193

MONTH OF OCTOBER

The Service of the Fathers of the Seventh Ecumenical Council.
(Note: On the 11th of this month falling on a Sunday, or on the first Sunday after this date, the Service of the Holy Fathers of the Seventh Ecumenical Council is sung according to the following order):

1.    In Vespers, on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 4 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 6 Prosomia Hymns of the Saints. Glory, “Let us extol today those mystical trumpets,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode. Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” the Prokimenon and the Readings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, “The yearly commemoration today,” Now and ever, “Look down upon our petitions.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection, of the Saints, the Theotokion and Dismissal.
2.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50 the Triadic Canon, then the Glory of the Saints “Of Apostolic traditions,” Now and ever Prosomion Theotokion “Theotokos, the protection,” and the Triadic “It is meet”; the Trisagion, the Apolytikion “O Christ our God, most glorious You are” and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Polyeleos, the Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Saints. After the 3rd Ode, the Resurrection Kontakion and Ikos (read), and the Kathisma of the Saints “Brightly shining luminaries,” and the Theotokion, “Accept quickly, O Lady”. After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Fathers, the Minologion of the Saints of the day and of the Fathers. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Saints and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Saints, Glory, “The chorus of the Holy Fathers,” Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.”
3.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4hymns from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Saints. After the Entrance, the Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Saints, that of the Saint of the Church. Kontakion “Protection of all Christians”; Apostolos “My child Titus” and Gospel “A sower went out to sow his seed” (4th Sunday of Luke). At

*(Printed Page 193)*

=== LEAF p209 ===
[Original Greek Text: Menaion — October: Fathers of the 7th Ecumenical Council Concl. / October 18: St. Luke (p. 194)]

194

σπεῖραι τὸν σπόρον αὐτοῦ. (Κυριακὴ Δ΄ Λουκᾶ). Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε, Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    (Σημ. Ἰστέον ὅτι τρὶς τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν τῶν ἁγίων Πατέρων· καὶ τῆς μὲν Α΄ Συνόδου, κατὰ τὴν Ζ΄ Κυριακὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ Πάσχα, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται Εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ Ἰωάννην Τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ ἐπάρας ὁ Ἰησοῦς τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν. Τῆς δὲ Δ΄ Συνόδου, τὴν Κυριακὴν ἥτις ἤθελε τύχει ἀπὸ τῆς ΙΓ΄ μέχρι τῆς ΙΘ΄ τοῦ Ἰουλίου μηνός, καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται Εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ Ματθαῖον Εἶπεν ὁ Κύριος τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ μαθηταῖς· ὑμεῖς ἐστε τὸ φῶς τοῦ κόσμου. Καὶ τῆς Ζ΄ Συνόδου, τὴν ἀπὸ τῆς ΙΑ΄ μέχρι τῆς ΙΖ΄ Ὀκτωβρίου Κυριακὴν ὅτε καὶ ἀναγινώσκεται Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Δ΄ Κυριακῆς Λουκᾶ Εἶπεν ὁ Κύριος· ἐξῆλθεν ὁ σπείρων τοῦ σπεῖραι τὸν σπόρον αὐτοῦ.

Τῇ ΙΗ΄.    Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἀποστόλου καὶ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ Λουκᾶ

1.    Εἰ τύχοι ἡ μνήμη τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ ἐν πάσῃ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ πλὴν Κυριακῆς, ἡ Ἀκολουθία ψάλλεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Μηναίου διάταξιν.
2.    Εἰ τύχοι ἐν ἡμέρᾳ Κυριακῇ, τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακὸν καὶ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρὰ ς΄ καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου δ΄. Δόξα Ἀπόστολε Χριστοῦ Καὶ νῦν τὸ α΄ Θεοτοκίον τοῦ ἤχου, Εἴσοδος, Φῶς ἱλαρόν, καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα Πάνσοφε ἁλιεῦ, Καὶ νῦν Ὁ ποιητὴς καὶ λυτρωτής μου, Ἀπολυτίκια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ, τὸ Θεοτοκίον Σὲ τὴν μεσιτεύσασαν καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
3.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ὁ Τριαδικὸς κανών, καὶ τὰ Τριαδικὰ Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, εἶτα τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος, τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν Ἑσπερινόν, εἶτα τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα Καθίσματα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοή, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον. Κανόνες ὁ ἀναστάσιμος καὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κοντάκιον τοῦ Ἀποστόλου, εἶτα τὸ Κάθισμα Ὡς συνέκδημος Παύλου, καὶ Θεοτοκίον· ἀφ’ ς΄ Κοντάκιον καὶ Οἶκος τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα, καὶ τὸ Μηνολόγιον, αἱ Καταβασίαι Ἀνοίξω τὸ στόμα μου καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν. Ἐξαποστειλάρια τὸ Ἀναστάσιμον, τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους Ἀναστάσιμα στιχηρὰ δ΄ καὶ δ΄ Δόξα τοῦ Εὐαγγελιστοῦ. Καὶ νῦν Ὑπερευλογημένη,

*(Printed Page 194)*

=== LEAF p210 ===
[English Facing Translation: Menaion — October: Fathers of the 7th Ecumenical Council Concl. / October 18: St. Luke (p. 195)]

195

“Especially,” “It is meet,” Communion Hymn “Praise,” “We have seen the [true] light,” and Dismissal.
    (Note: One must bear in mind that we commemorate the Holy Fathers three times in the year: Those of the 1st Council on the 7th Sunday after Easter, when the Gospel from John is read “At that time, Jesus lifting up his eyes to heaven” (John 17:1-13). Those of the 4th Council on the Sunday between July 13 and 19, when we read the Gospel from Matthew “The Lord said to his disciples: You are the light of the world” (Matthew 5:14-19). Those of the 7th Council, on the Sunday between October 11 and 17, when the Gospel of the 4th Sunday of Luke is read “The Lord said: A sower went out to sow his seed” (Luke 8:5-15).

The 18th    The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Luke.

1.    If the commemoration of the Evangelist occurs on any day except Sunday, his Service is sung according to the order of the Mineon.
2.    If the Feast occurs on a Sunday, in Vespers, on Saturday evening following the Introductory Psalm and the Psalter, at “Lord, I have cried” we sing 6 Stichira of the Resurrection, and 4 of the Evangelist. Glory, “Apostle of Christ,” Now and ever the first Theotokion of the Mode, Entrance, “O Gladsome Light,” then the Prokimenon. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, “All-wise fisherman,” Now and ever, “My creator and saviour.” The Apolytikia: of the Resurrection and of the Evangelist, the Theotokion “You the intercessor,” and Dismissal.
3.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, and the Triadic “It is meet”; then the Trisagion, the Apolytikion of the Apostle and the Exapsalmos. At “God is the Lord”: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the Amomos, the Resurrection Kathismata, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoi, the Anavathmi of the Mode and the Prokimenon. The Canons of the Resurrection and of the Apostle. After the 3rd Ode, the Kontakion of the Apostle, then the Kathisma “As travelling companion of Paul,” and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, the Minologion. The Katavasie “I shall open my mouth,” and the entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing “More honorable.” Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Evangelist and the Theotokion. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 Stichira of the Evangelist, Glory of the Evangelist, Now and ever, “Most blessed,” Great Doxology and “Today salvation.” In the Liturgy the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4

*(Printed Page 195)*
