=== LEAF p831 ===
[Original Greek Text: Apodosis of Pascha Liturgy (§ 37) and Thursday of the Ascension: Vespers (§ 38) and Matins (§ 39) (p. 816)]

816

37.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα τοῦ Πάσχα καὶ τὸ
Εἰσοδικόν. Μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ
καὶ τὸ Κοντάκιον, Ὅσοι εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, Ἀπόστολος
καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Ὁ Ἄγγελος ἐβόα
. . . Φωτίζου, φωτίζου, Κοινωνικὸν τοῦ Πάσχα, Χριστὸς
ἀνέστη. Μετὰ τὴν Ὀπισθάμβωνον εὐχήν, τὸ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη
ἐκ γ΄ χῦμα, Ἀπόλυσις καὶ Ἀπόδοσις.

Τῌ ΠΕΜΠΤῌ ΤΗΣ ΑΝΑΛΗΨΕΩΣ

38.    Τῇ Τετάρτῃ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὴν Θ΄ τοῦ Πάσχα, ὁ Ἱερεὺς
Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς καὶ ἄρχεται ὁ Προοιμιακὸς μετὰ τοῦ Δεῦτε
προσκυνήσωμεν ἐκ γ΄. Εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν τὰ [ε]1
Ἰδιόμελα Ὁ Κύριος ἀνελήφθη εἰς ς΄ δευτεροῦντες τὸ α΄. Δόξα,
Καὶ νῦν, Τῶν κόλπων τῶν Πατρικῶν. Εἴσοδος, τὸ Προκείμενον
τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ γ΄
Ἰδιόμελα, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ἀνέβη ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ἀλαλαγμῷ, τὸ
Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ γ΄ καὶ Ἀπόλυσις μετὰ τοῦ Ὁ ἐν δόξῃ
ἀναληφθεὶς ἀφ᾿ ἡμῶν εἰς τοὺς Οὐρανοὺς καὶ ἐν δεξιᾷ
καθίσας τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ Πατρός, Χριστὸς ὁ ἀληθινὸς . . .
39.    Τῇ Πέμπτῃ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμόν, ἡ Λιτή, εἶτα
τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον ἐκ γ΄, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Πολυέλεος· τὰ Καθίσματα
κατὰ σειρὰν ἐκ β΄, οἱ Ἀναβαθμοί, τὸ α΄ Ἀντίφωνον τοῦ δ΄ ἤχου,
τὸ Προκείμενον Ἀνέβη ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ἀλαλαγμῷ, Κύριος ἐν φωνῇ
σάλπιγγος, τὸ Πᾶσα πνοὴ καὶ τὸ γ΄ Ἑωθινὸν Εὐαγγέλιον, τὸ
Ἀνάστασιν Χριστοῦ θεασάμενοι, καὶ ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς χῦμα. Δόξα,
Ταῖς τῶν Ἀποστόλων, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς τῆς Θεοτόκου, ὁ Στίχος
Ἐλέησόν με ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τὸ Ἰδιόμελον Σήμερον ἐν Οὐρανοῖς
αἱ ἄνω δυνάμεις. Οἱ Κανόνες ἀμφότεροι εἰς ς΄ καὶ εἰς δ΄ ἄνευ
στίχων· ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ Κάθισμα ἅπαξ, ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον καὶ
ὁ Οἶκος, τὸ Μηνολόγιον καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς Ὑπόμνημα. Αἱ
Καταβασίαι Θείῳ καλυφθείς, εἶτα ψάλλεται ἡ Θ΄ ὁ μὲν α΄ Κανὼν
ἄνευ Στίχου, ὁ β΄ μετὰ τοῦ Μεγαλυναρίου Ἄγγελοι τὴν ἄνοδον
τοῦ Δεσπότου . . . πῶς μετὰ δόξης ἐπήρθη ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς
εἰς τὰ ἄνω· ἡ Καταβασία Χαίροις Ἄνασσα, τὸ Ἐξαποστειλάριον
ἐκ γ΄. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ γ΄ Προσόμοια εἰς δ΄, Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν,
Ἐτέχθης ὡς αὐτὸς ἠθέλησας, Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Ἀνελήφθης
ἐν δόξῃ.

*(Printed Page 816)*

=== LEAF p832 ===
[English Facing Translation: Apodosis of Pascha Liturgy (§ 37) and Thursday of the Ascension: Vespers (§ 38) and Matins (§ 39) (p. 817)]

817

37.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons and the Entrance Hymn of Easter.
After the Entrance we chant "Christ is risen," the Ypakoi, and the Kontakion.
[Instead of the Trisagios Hymn] we chant "As many as have been baptized
in Christ"; the Apostolos and the Gospel of the day. At "Especially," "The
Angel cried out . . . Shine, shine," Communion Hymn of Easter, "Christ is
risen." After the Prayer behind the Amvon "Christ is risen" (three times)
intoned plainly, the Dismissal, and the Leave-taking.

THE THURSDAY OF THE ASCENSION

38.    On Wednesday evening, after the 9th Hour of Pascha, the Priest
intones "Blessed is our God," and the Introductory Psalm is begun with
"Come, let us worship (three times)." At "Lord, I have cried" we chant the
[5] Idiomela "The Lord ascended" [5 hymns with the first hymn repeated
once for a total of 6 hymns]. Glory, Now and ever, "From the Fatherly
bosom." The Entrance, the Prokimenon of the day and the Readings. At the
Aposticha: the three Idiomela, Glory, Now and ever, "God is gone up in a
shout." The Apolytikion three times and Dismissal with the following
prologue: "You who gloriously ascended from us to the Heavens and sat
at the right hand of God the Father, Christ our true God . . ."
39.    On Thursday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Liti, then the Trisagion,
the Apolytikion and the Exapsalmos. At "God is the Lord: the Apolytikion
three times; then the Psalter and the Polyeleos. The Kathismata in order,
twice each, the Anavathmi, the first Antiphon of Mode IV and the Prokimenon
"God is gone up in a shout, the Lord with the voice of the trumpet." Then
"Let everything that breathes" and the third Gospel of Matins, the "Having
beheld the Resurrection of Christ," and Psalm 50 (read). Glory, "By the
intercessions of the Apostles," Now and ever, "By the intercessions of the
Theotokos," the Verse "Have mercy on me, O God" and the Idiomelon
"Today the high hosts in the Heavens." Both Canons, the first with six
hymns and the second with four without verses. After the 3rd Ode, the
Kathisma (once); after the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos, the Minologion,
and the Postscript of the Feast. The Katavasie "Covered by a divine cloud,"
then the 9th Ode of the first Canon is chanted without verses and that of the
second Canon with its Megalynarion "The Angels seeing the ascension of
the Master, . . . how He was taken up with glory from the earth unto the
heights" with the Katavasia "Rejoice, O Queen." Then the Exapostilarion
(three times). At the Praises: the three Prosomia in 4 {the 1st one is
repeated}, Glory, Now and ever "You were born as You Yourself did will,"

*(Printed Page 817)*

=== LEAF p833 ===
[Original Greek Text: Thursday of the Ascension: Divine Liturgy Antiphons (§ 40) (p. 818)]

818

40.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν τὰ Ἀντίφωνα·

Ἀντίφωνον Α΄

Πάντα τὰ ἔθνη κροτήσατε χεῖρας,
ἀλαλάξατε τῷ Θεῷ τῷ Σωτῆρι ἡμῶν.
Ὅτι Κύριος ὕψιστος, φοβερὸς
βασιλεὺς Μέγας, ἐπὶ πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν.
Ὑπέταξε λαοὺς ἡμῖν
καὶ ἔθνη ὑπὸ τοὺς πόδας ἡμῶν.
    | Ταῖς πρεσβείαις
    | τῆς Θεοτόκου...
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ταῖς πρεσβείαις τῆς Θεοτόκου . . .

Ἀντίφωνον Β΄

Μέγας Κύριος καὶ αἰνετὸς σφόδρα
ἐν πόλει ἁγίᾳ αὐτοῦ.
Ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ταῖς βάρεσιν αὐτῆς
γινώσκεται.
Ὅτι ἰδοὺ οἱ βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς
συνήχθησαν.
    | Σῶσον ἡμᾶς...
    | ὁ ἐν δόξῃ
    | ἀναληφθείς
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ μονογενὴς Υἱός.

Ἀντίφωνον Γ΄

Ἀκούσατε ταῦτα πάντα τὰ ἔθνη.
Τὸ στόμα μου λαλήσει σοφίαν,
καὶ ἡ μελέτη τῆς καρδίας μου σύνεσιν.
Κλινῶ εἰς παραβολὴν τὸ οὖς μου,
ἀνοίξω ἐν ψαλτηρίῳ τὸ πρόβλημά μου.
    | Ἀνελήφθης
    | ἐν δόξῃ.
Εἰσοδικόν, Ἀνέβη ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ἀλαλαγμῷ, Κύριος ἐν
φωνῇ σάλπιγγος· Σῶσον ἡμᾶς Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, ὁ ἐν δόξῃ
ἀναληφθείς· τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ, τὸ
Κοντάκιον Τὴν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν πληρώσας, ὁ Ἀπόστολος καὶ τὸ

*(Printed Page 818)*

=== LEAF p834 ===
[English Facing Translation: Thursday of the Ascension: Matins Concluded (§ 39) and Divine Liturgy Antiphons (§ 40) (p. 819)]

819

the Great Doxology and [the Apolytikion] "You have ascended in glory."
40.    In the Liturgy the Antiphons:

ANTIPHON ONE

Clap your hands, all you nations;
shout unto God with a voice of rejoicing.
For the Lord Most high is terrible,
a great King over all the earth.
He has subdued peoples under us,
and nations under our feet.
    | Through the
    | intercessions
    | of the The-
    | otokos, [Sav-
    | ior, save us.]
Glory to the Father and the Son and the
Holy Spirit, now and ever and the the ages of
ages. Amen.

ANTIPHON TWO

Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised, in the city of our God, in His holy
mountain.
God is known in her towers, when He
comes to help her.
For lo, the kings of the earth were
assembled; they came together.
    | [Save us, O Son of
    | God,] Who has as-
    | cended from us in
    | glory [into the
    | Heavens, save us
    | who sing to You:
    | Alleluia.]
Glory [to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit], now and
ever [and the the ages of ages. Amen.]
Only-begotten Son and Word of God ...

ANTIPHON THREE

Hear this, all ye nations
My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the
meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.
I will incline my ear unto a parable,
will unfold my problem on the psaltery.
    | You have
    | ascended
    | in glory.
The Entrance Hymn "God ascended in a shout, the Lord with the
voice of the trumpet"; "O Son of God, Who has ascended from us in
glory into the Heavens, [save us who sing to You: Alleluia.]"
The Apolytikion "You have ascended in glory," the Kontakion "When

*(Printed Page 819)*

=== LEAF p835 ===
[Original Greek Text: Ascension Liturgy Concluded (§ 40) and The Seventh Sunday: Holy Fathers of the First Synod at Nicea (§§ 41–42) (p. 820)]

820

Εὐαγγέλιον. Εἰς τὸ Ἐξαιρέτως Σὲ τὴν ὑπὲρ νοῦν, Κοινωνικὸν
Ἀνέβη ὁ Θεὸς ἐν ἀλαλαγμῷ, μετὰ τὸ Κοινωνικὸν τὸ
Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις ἡ
καὶ ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ 13

Τῌ Ζ΄ ΚΥΡΙΑΚῌ ΤΩΝ ΑΓΙΩΝ ΠΑΤΕΡΩΝ
ΤΗΣ ΕΝ ΝΙΚΑΙᾼ Α΄ ΣΥΝΟΔΟΥ

41.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἑσπέρας, μετὰ τὸ Ψαλτήριον, Εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν Ἀναστάσιμα γ΄, τῆς Ἀναλήψεως γ΄ καὶ τῶν
Πατέρων δ΄. Δόξα, Τὰς μυστικὰς σήμερον, Καὶ νῦν, Τίς μὴ
μακαρίσει σε. Εἴσοδος Φῶς ἱλαρόν, τὸ Προκείμενον καὶ τὰ
Ἀναγνώσματα. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὰ Ἀναστάσιμα Στιχηρά, Δόξα,
Τὴν ἐτήσιον μνήμην σήμερον, Καὶ νῦν, τῆς ἑορτῆς, Κύριε τὸ
μυστήριον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, Δόξα, τὸ τῶν Πατέρων, Καὶ
νῦν, τὸ Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.

42.    Τῇ Κυριακῇ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸν Ν΄ ψαλμὸν ὁ Τριαδικὸς
κανών, τὸ τῆς Λιτῆς Δόξα, Ἀποστολικῶν παραδόσεων, Καὶ
νῦν, Κύριε τῆς οἰκονομίας πληρώσας τὸ μυστήριον, τὰ
Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ὑπερδεδοξασμένος εἶ καὶ ὁ
Ἑξάψαλμος. Εἰς τὸ Θεὸς Κύριος τὰ Ἀπολυτίκια ὡς εἰς τὸν
Ἑσπερινόν, τὸ Ψαλτήριον καὶ ὁ Ἄμωμος, τὰ ἀναστάσιμα κατὰ
σειρὰν Καθίσματα, τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, ἡ Ὑπακοὴ τοῦ ἤχου, οἱ
Ἀναβαθμοὶ καὶ τὸ Προκείμενον· οἱ Κανόνες, ὁ Ἀναστάσιμος, ὁ
τῆς ἑορτῆς καὶ ὁ τῶν Πατέρων. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς {Σημ. Μεταφραστοῦ·
Λέγομεν τὸ Κοντάκιον τῆς Ἀναλήψεως. Αὐτὸ ὑποδεικνύουν τὸ Πεντηκοστάριον
καὶ τὰ 1998 καὶ 1999 Ἡμερολόγια [ΗΟΠ]. Παρότι τὸ Τυπικὸν δὲν εἶναι σαφὲς
εἰς αὐτὸ τὸ σημεῖον, ἡ Προθεωρία, σελ. (Βιολάκης σελ. 22), §25, ὑποστηρίζει
αὐτὴν τὴν πράξην}, τὸ Κάθισμα τῶν Πατέρων, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Ἀφ᾿
ς΄ Κοντάκιον, καὶ Οἶκος τὰ τῶν Πατέρων, τὸ Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ
Ὑπόμνημα τῆς Κυριακῆς τῶν Πατέρων. Αἱ Καταβασίαι Θείῳ
καλυφθείς, καὶ ἅπασα ἡ τάξις τοῦ Ἑωθινοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· εἶτα
στιχολογοῦμεν Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἐξαποστειλάριον,
τὸ τῶν Πατέρων, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, ἀναστάσιμα
δ΄ καὶ τῶν Πατέρων δ΄. Δόξα, Τῶν Ἁγίων Πατέρων ὁ χορός,
Καὶ νῦν, Ὑπερευλογημένη. Δοξολογία Μ. καὶ τὸ Σήμερον
σωτηρία.

*(Printed Page 820)*

=== LEAF p836 ===
[English Facing Translation: Ascension Liturgy Concluded (§ 40) and The Seventh Sunday: Holy Fathers of the First Synod at Nicea (§§ 41–42) (p. 821)]

821

You had fulfilled," the Apostolos and the Gospel. At "Especially," "You,
who are above the human mind," Communion Hymn "God is gone up in
a shout, the Lord with the voice of the trumpet. Alleluia." After the
Communion Hymn, [the Apolytikion] "You have ascended in glory";
"Blessed be the name of the Lord," and the Dismissal as in Vespers. 13

THE SEVENTH SUNDAY THE HOLY FATHERS
OF THE FIRST SYNOD AT NICEA

41.    In Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory Psalm
and the Psalter, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant 3 Stichira of the
Resurrection, 3 of the Ascension, and 4 of the Fathers. Glory, "Let us extol
today those mystical trumpets," Now and ever, "Who would not call you
blessed." Entrance, "O Gladsome Light," the Prokimenon and the Read-
ings. At the Aposticha: the Resurrection Stichira, Glory, "The yearly
commemoration today," Now and ever, "Lord, the mystery." The
Apolytikion of the Resurrection, Glory that of the Fathers, Now and ever,
"You have ascended in glory," and Dismissal.
42.    On Sunday at Matins, after Psalm 50, the Triadic Canon, the Glory
of the Liti "Of the Apostolic traditions," Now and ever of the Feast "Lord,
when You did fulfill the mystery of the economy"; then the "It is meet,"
the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "Exceedingly glorified" and the Exapsalmos.
At God is the Lord: the Apolytikia as in Vespers, then the Psalter and the
Amomos. The Resurrection Kathismata in order, the Evlogitaria, the
Ypakoi of the Mode, the Anavathmi, and the Prokimenon. The Canons of
the Resurrection, of the Feast, and of the Fathers. After the 3rd Ode,
{Translator's Note: We recite the Kontakion of the Ascension. Note that this is indicated both in the
Pentikostarion and Imerologia [IEP] 1998 and 1999; though the Typikon itself is not clear on this issue,
it appears that a look at the Protheoria [p. , (Violakis, p. 22), Para. 25] supports this usage} and then
the Kathisma of the Fathers and that of the Feast. After the 6th Ode, the
Kontakion and Ikos of the Fathers, the Minologion and the Postscript of the
Sunday of the Fathers. The Katavasie "Covered by a divine cloud," and the
entire order of the Morning Gospel; then we sing, with verses, "More
honorable." Exapostilaria: of the Resurrection, of the Fathers and of the
Feast. At the Praises: 4 Resurrection Stichira and 4 of the Fathers, Glory,
"The chorus of the Holy Fathers," Now and ever, "Most blessed." Great
Doxology and "Today salvation."

*(Printed Page 821)*

=== LEAF p837 ===
[Original Greek Text: Seventh Sunday Liturgy (§ 43), Apodosis of Ascension Note, and Saturday of the Seventh Week: Memorial Saturday (§ 44 Opening) (p. 822)]

822

43.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Τυπικὰ καὶ οἱ Μακαρισμοὶ τοῦ ἤχου
εἰς δ΄ καὶ δ΄ ἐκ τῆς ς΄ Ὠδῆς τοῦ Κανόνος τῶν Πατέρων. Μετὰ τὴν
Εἴσοδον, τὸ ἀναστάσιμον Ἀπολυτίκιον, τὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς τῶν Πατέρων,
καὶ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ· Κοντάκιον Τὴν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν πληρώσας
οἰκονομίαν· Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς Κυριακῆς. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως, Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Αἰνεῖτε τὸν Κύριον· εἰς
τὸ Μετὰ φόβου Θεοῦ Ἀνελήφθης ἐν δόξῃ, Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου
καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ τῆς αὐτῆς ἑβδομάδος ἀποδίδοται ἡ ἑορτὴ τῆς
Ἀναλήψεως, καὶ ψάλλεται ἡ Ἀκολουθία τῆς ἑορτῆς ἀπαραλλάκτως
ὡς διετάχθη ἐν § 38-40, ἐξαιρουμένων, ἐν μὲν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ τῶν
Ἀναγνωσμάτων, ἐν δὲ τῷ Ὄρθρῳ, τῆς Λιτῆς τοῦ Πολυελέου μετὰ τοῦ
Καθίσματος τῆς γ΄ Στιχολογίας, καὶ τοῦ Εὐαγγελίου· ἐν τῇ Λειτουργίᾳ
Ἀπόστολος καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον λέγονται τῆς ἡμέρας.

Τῼ ΣΑΒΒΑΤῼ ΤΗΣ ΑΥΤΗΣ [Ζ΄] ΕΒΔΟΜΑΔΟΣ
[ΗΤΟΙ Τῼ ΣΑΒΒΑΤῼ ΠΡΟ ΤΗΣ ΠΕΝΤΗΚΟΣΤΗΣ]

Μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν πάντων τῶν ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος
Κεκοιμημένων εὐσεβῶν Χριστιανῶν.

44.    Τῇ Παρασκευῇ ἑσπέρας, εἰς τὸ Κύριε ἐκέκραξα ψάλλομεν
ς΄ Στιχηρά, Μαρτυρικὰ δ΄ (ἐκ τῆς Ὀκτωήχου) Οἱ Μάρτυρές σου
Κύριε, καὶ γ΄ τῶν Κεκοιμημένων Τῶν ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος σήμερον
νεκρῶν, Δόξα, Θρηνῶ καὶ ὀδύρομαι, Καὶ νῦν, Τίς μὴ
μακαρίσει σε, ἀντὶ Προκειμένου ψάλλεται τρεῖς φορὰς τὸ
Ἀλληλούϊα ἐκ γ΄ μετὰ τῶν ὡρισμένων στίχων εἰς τὰς δύο
τελευταίας φοράς. Εἰς τὰ Ἀπόστιχα τὸ Μαρτυρικὸν Ὁ Σταυρός
σου Κύριε, καὶ τὰ δύο Νεκρώσιμα μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτῶν. Δόξα,
Ἀρχή μοι καὶ ὑπόστασις, Καὶ νῦν, Πρεσβείαις τῆς
τεκούσης σε, τὸ Νῦν ἀπολύεις, καὶ εὐθὺς ψάλλεται ὁ Κανὼν Ἐν
οὐρανίοις θαλάμοις μετὰ τῶν Στίχων Πρεσβείαις τῶν
Μαρτύρων σου, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, ἀνάπαυσον τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν
δούλων σου, καὶ τὸ Αἱ ψυχαὶ αὐτῶν ἐν ἀγαθοῖς αὐλισθήσονται,
Δόξα, Καὶ νῦν, ἐν ἑκάστῃ Ὠδῇ. Ἀπ᾿ θ΄ ὁ Εἱρμός, τὸ Τρισάγιον,
τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὁ βάθει σοφίας, Δόξα, τὸ τέλος Ἐν σοὶ γὰρ
τὴν ἐλπίδα κτλ. Καὶ νῦν, Σὲ καὶ τεῖχος καὶ λιμένα ἔχομεν,
εἶτα Μετὰ Πνευμάτων δικαίων κτλ. καὶ μνημονεύονται ἐπὶ τῶν
κολλύβων τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν Κεκοιμημένων, ὡς ἐσημειώθη ἐν τῷ Τριῳ

*(Printed Page 822)*

=== LEAF p838 ===
[English Facing Translation: Seventh Sunday Liturgy (§ 43), Apodosis of Ascension Note, and Saturday of the Seventh Week: Memorial Saturday (§ 44 Opening) (p. 823)]

823

43.    In the Liturgy, the Typika and 4 Beatitudes of the Mode and 4 hymns
from the 6th Ode of the Canon of the Fathers. After the Entrance, the
Resurrection Apolytikion, that of the Feast, that of the Fathers, that of the
Saint of the Church, and the Kontakion "When You had fulfilled for us the
economy." Apostolos and Gospel of the Sunday. At "Especially," "It is
meet," Communion Hymn "Praise the Lord"; at "With the fear of God,"
we chant "You ascended in glory." Then "Blessed be the name of the
Lord" and Dismissal.
    On Friday of this week the Leave-taking of the Feast of the
Ascension takes place; the Service is sung exactly as prescribed in
Paragraphs 38 - 40: in Vespers, with the exception of the Readings; and in
Matins, with the exception of the Liti of the Polyeleos with its Kathisma of
the Third Stasis, and also of the Gospel. In the Liturgy, we read the
Apostolos and Gospel of the day.

THE SATURDAY OF THIS [SEVENTH] WEEK
[THAT IS, THE SATURDAY BEFORE PENTECOST]

We make commemoration of all those pious Christians who have
reposed through the ages.

44.    On Friday evening, at "Lord, I have cried" we chant six verses and
the 4 Martyrika {from the Oktoichos} "Your Martyrs, O Lord," and 3 for
the Reposed "Today, those who have died in times past," Glory, "I weep
and I lament," Now and ever, "Who would not call you blessed." Instead
of the Prokimenon, we chant "Alleluia" three times with the verses
designated to be sung only at the last two times. At the Aposticha: the
Martyrikon "Your Cross, O Lord" and the two of the Reposed with their
verses. Glory, "My origin and foundation," Now and ever, "By Your
birthgiver's intercessions." The "Now let [Your servant] depart" and
immediately we chant the Canon "In heavenly bridal chambers" with the
Verses "Through the intercessions of Your Martyrs, Christ our God, give
rest to the souls of Your servants" and the "Their souls shall dwell with
good things." Glory, Now and ever in each Ode. After the 9th Ode, the
Irmos, the Trisagion, the Apolytikion "With the depth of wisdom." Glory,
the ending: "For in You [they have placed] their hope," Now and ever,
"You do we have as a rampart and haven," then "With the souls of the
righteous" etc., and the names of the Reposed are commemorated over the
Kollyva [commemorative tray with boiled wheat, as noted in the Triodion,

*(Printed Page 823)*

=== LEAF p839 ===
[Original Greek Text: Memorial Saturday Concluded (§§ 44–46) and The Sunday of Pentecost: Vespers Opening (§ 47) (p. 824)]

824

δίῳ, Σαββάτῳ πρὸ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω, καὶ Ἀπόλυσις.
45.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ εἰς τὸν Ὄρθρον, μετὰ τὸ Μεσονυκτικὸν τὸ
Τρισάγιον, τὸ Ὁ βάθει σοφίας, καὶ ὁ Ἑξάψαλμος· εἶτα τὸ Ἀλληλούϊα
μετὰ τῶν Στίχων αὐτοῦ καὶ τῶν Ἀπολυτικίων, ὡς ἐλέχθη ἐν τῷ
Σαββάτῳ πρὸ τῆς Ἀπόκρεω· τὸ Ψαλτήριον, τὰ Καθίσματα, καὶ ὁ
Ἄμωμος, καὶ μνημονεύονται τὰ ὀνόματα ὡς χθὲς ἐν τῷ Ἑσπερινῷ
— τὰ Εὐλογητάρια, καὶ μετὰ τὴν Ἐκφώνησιν, {τὸ Κάθισμα}
Ἀνάπαυσον Σωτὴρ ἡμῶν, {Δόξα,} Καὶ νῦν, Ὁ ἐκ Παρθένου
ἀνατείλας· εἶτα ὁ Ν΄ ψαλμὸς καὶ ὁ Κανὼν Ψυχῶν πασῶν ὁ
Δεσπότης μετὰ τῶν ὡρισμένων Στίχων. Ἀπὸ γ΄ Ὠδῆς τὸ
Κάθισμα, καὶ τὸ Θεοτοκίον. Ἀφ᾿ ς΄ τὸ Κοντάκιον, ὁ Οἶκος τὸ
Μηνολόγιον, καὶ τὸ Ὑπόμνημα τοῦ Τριῳδίου· εἶτα ψάλλεται ὁ
Εἱρμὸς τῆς η΄ Ὠδῆς Ἔκστηθι φρίττων Οὐρανέ, καὶ στιχολογοῦμεν
Τὴν τιμιωτέραν, ὁ Εἱρμὸς Ἀπορεῖ πᾶσα γλῶσσα, τὰ β΄
Ἐξαποστειλάρια. Εἰς τοὺς Αἴνους, τὰ δ΄ Στιχηρὰ Φοβερὸν τὸ
τέλος τὸ τοῦ θανάτου, Δόξα, Ὡς ἄνθος μαραίνεται, Καὶ νῦν,
Σὺ εἶ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, τὸ Σοὶ δόξα πρέπει χῦμα, ἡ Συναπτή, καὶ
τὰ δ΄ Ἀπόστιχα Ἔχων ἀκατάληπτον, Δόξα, Ἄλγος τῷ Ἀδάμ,
Καὶ νῦν, Ὤφθης ἐνδιαίτημα, τὸ Ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι,
τὸ Τρισάγιον, τὰ δύο Τροπάρια, Ὁ βάθει σοφίας, καὶ τὸ Σὲ καὶ
τεῖχος.
46.    Εἰς τὴν Λειτουργίαν, τὰ Ἀντίφωνα, Ἀγαθὸν τὸ
ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, μετὰ τὴν Εἴσοδον τὸ Ἀπολυτίκιον Ὁ βάθει
σοφίας, τὸ τοῦ Ἁγίου τοῦ Ναοῦ, τὸ Κοντάκιον Μετὰ τῶν Ἁγίων
ἀνάπαυσον Χριστέ (ὅρα ς΄ Ὠδὴν τοῦ ἑσπερινοῦ Κανόνος).
Ἀπόστολος Νεκρώσιμος, καὶ Εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἡμέρας. Εἰς τὸ
Ἐξαιρέτως Ἄξιόν ἐστιν, Κοινωνικὸν Μακάριοι οὓς ἐξελέξω,
ἀντὶ τοῦ Εἴδομεν τὸ φῶς, Ὁ βάθει σοφίας φιλανθρώπως
πάντα οἰκονομῶν 14· εἶτα ψάλλεται τὸ Μετὰ πνευμάτων
δικαίων, καὶ μνημονεύονται τὰ ὀνόματα πάντων τῶν ἀπ᾿ αἰῶνος
κεκοιμημένων εὐσεβῶν καὶ Ὀρθοδόξων Χριστιανῶν κτλ. καὶ
Ἀπόλυσις.

Τῌ ΚΥΡΙΑΚῌ ΤΗΣ ΠΕΝΤΗΚΟΣΤΗΣ

47.    Τῷ Σαββάτῳ ἐν τῷ Μ. Ἑσπερινῷ, μετὰ τὸν Προοιμιακόν,
οὐ στιχολογοῦμεν· {τὸ Ψαλτήριον. Σημειωτέον ὅτι τὸ Πεντηκοστάριον
συνιστᾷ τὸ πρῶτον Κάθισμα τοῦ Ψαλτηρίου}· εἰς τὸ Κύριε
ἐκέκραξα, ἱστῶμεν Στίχους ι΄ καὶ λέγομεν τὰ γ΄ Ἰδιόμελα τοῦ α΄

*(Printed Page 824)*

=== LEAF p840 ===
[English Facing Translation: Memorial Saturday Concluded (§§ 44–46) and The Sunday of Pentecost: Vespers Opening (§ 47) (p. 825)]

825

Saturday before Meatfare Sunday. The Dismissal follows.
45.    On Saturday at Matins, after the Midnight service, the Trisagion,
"With the depth of wisdom" and the Exapsalmos; then "Alleluia" with its
verses and the Apolytikia, as prescribed on the Saturday before Meatfare
Sunday; the Psalter, the Kathismata and the Amomos, and the names [of the
Reposed] are commemorated as yesterday at Vespers; the Evlogitaria, and
after the Exclamation, {the Kathisma} "Grant rest with the righteous, our
Savior," {Glory,} Now and ever, "You Who have dawned from the
Virgin." Then Psalm 50, and the Canon "The Master of all souls," with the
prescribed verses. After the 3rd Ode, the Kathisma and the Theotokion.
After the 6th Ode, the Kontakion, the Ikos, the Minologion, and the
Postscript of the Triodion; then the Irmos of the 8th Ode "Be astonished and
tremble, O Heaven," "More honorable," the Irmos "Every tongue is at a
loss" and the 2 Exapostilaria. At the Praises: the 4 Stichira "Dreaded is the
last moment before death's coming," Glory, "[Every man] withers like a
flower," Now and ever, "You are our God," the "To You belongs glory"
(read), the Synapti, and the 4 Aposticha "Since You have an inconceivable
compassion," Glory, "A pain to Adam," Now and ever, "You have been
seen as a dwelling place" then "It is good to confess"; the Trisagion, the
two Hymns "With the depth of wisdom" and "You do we have as a rampart
[and haven.]"
46.    In the Liturgy, the Antiphons, "It is good to confess." After the
Entrance, the Apolytikion "With the depth of wisdom" and that of the Saint
of the Church, the Kontakion "With the Saints grant rest" (see the 6th Ode
of the Canon of Vespers). Apostolos of the Reposed and Gospel of the day.
At "Especially," "It is meet," Communion Hymn "Blessed are they whom
You have chosen." Instead of "We have seen the [true] light," we
chant "With the depth of wisdom providing for all with Love of mankind" 14
then the "With the spirits of the righteous," and the names of all the
deceased pious and Orthodox Christians from time immemorial are com-
memorated etc., and Dismissal.

THE SUNDAY OF PENTECOST

47.    In Great Vespers on Saturday evening, following the Introductory
Psalm, we do not read the Psalter {Note: The Pentikostarion asks for the
First Kathisma of the Psalter} at "Lord, I have cried" we allow for 10
verses and chant three Stichira of Mode I "We celebrate Pentecost" in 5,

*(Printed Page 825)*
