Appendix
Rubric of Divine Services:
Vespers, Matins and Divine
Liturgy[^753]
I. Introductory Remarks
1. The Sanctuary and the Holy Table
The sanctuary and the holy table must be correctly arranged so that the celebration of divine services can take place properly and appropriately:
1. The sanctuary should be at least one step higher than the temple of the faithful. Within the sanctuary itself, however, there should be no steps leading to the holy table.
2. The holy table is square, separated from the wall, situated in the middle of the sanctuary so that it can be walked around. Under the northern wall of the sanctuary is placed the table of proskomedia (oblation), and under the southern - another table, on which the sacred vestments are prepared.
3. The Artophorion, or tabernacle [kyvot], which is contained in the middle of the holy table (throne), must be constructed in the form of a small temple or tomb. It should not be too high and wide, so that by its dimensions it does not hinder the liturgical actions of the celebrant and concelebrants nor render them impossible.
4. Candlesticks standing on the holy table should not obscure it, but it is proper to place one candlestick with one, two or three candles on both sides of the cross or tabernacle. It is also permitted to use a seven-branched candlestick with oil lamps, which is placed behind the holy table.
5. It is not permitted to place on the holy table any reliquaries, nor flowers, natural or artificial, nor anything that is unnecessary for divine service. The book for divine service (Liturgicon) should be placed on a cushion, on the holy table, and not on a stand, unless it lies on an analogion on the left side of the throne.
6. The iconostasis must have the icon of the Savior to the right of the holy doors[^754] and of the Theotokos - to the left, and other icons placed, according to custom, in their places.
Side (secondary) churches and chapels must also have their own iconostases; and holy tables, as long as they do not have their own iconostases, are considered unsuitable for divine services.
7. No one dares to have entry into the sanctuary except priests, deacons, clerics and servers. For the faithful who do not cooperate in the divine service, there is no place in the sanctuary, and even less so for women, regardless of origin and reason.
8. The diskos should be sufficiently deep and provided with a rim; it may have a foot.
9. The censer must have short chains so that it can be set in motion with a light swing.
10. One should not use other liturgical vestments nor other liturgical cloths except those indicated in this Rubric for each divine service; the use of small bells, organs, large or small, i. e., harmoniums, is excluded.
2. General Rules
11. A small bow, - during which, signing ourselves with the sign of the cross, we incline the head and shoulders slightly, however we do not extend the hands to the knees or even to the ground, before or after the sign of the cross, - we make:
a) once, when:
- we pass by the iconostasis or the holy table;
- we enter the sanctuary, or leave it;
- we approach the holy table, or depart from it;
- we stand before the holy doors for a reading;
- at the beginning of every divine service;
- we mention the Most Holy Trinity in prayer;
- we receive the blessing of a Priest;
- the rubrics prescribe.
b) thrice at:
- "Holy God" and "To Thy Cross";
- "Come, let us worship";
- after the concluding "Alleluia, glory";
- during Lent, according to the prescriptions.
One should make the sign of the holy cross on oneself, however without bowing the head and shoulders, also at the beginning and at the end of the reading of the Gospel.
Also, the Deacon must show his respect by a slight bowing of the head and shoulders before the Priest when he leaves the sanctuary for the litany or when he returns to him.
12. A great bow [prostration], during which, signing ourselves with the sign of the cross, we fall to the ground with our whole body, we make only during the Forty Days [Lent] and at the Liturgy of Presanctified Gifts.
13. Prayers with extended and uplifted hands are recited only when this is explicitly prescribed, that is: at the prayer "No one is worthy" (at the Cherubic Hymn), at "Let us lift up our hearts" and at the Lord's Prayer. When extending the hands, the elbows should not rest on the sides, but the hands themselves should be freely lifted upwards.
14. The hands, if nothing is prescribed about them, can be held in various ways: placed on the holy table or holding the Liturgicon with them, lowered down under the phelonion or folded on the breast, but not interlocking finger to finger.
15. When the Deacon exclaims the litanies, he raises the orarion with three fingers of the right hand upwards, even if it is not always explicitly prescribed by the rubrics. Already at the beginning of the litanies, the Priest may begin to recite its prayer quietly.
16. When the Deacon exclaims: "Bow your heads unto the Lord," all bow their head and shoulders.
17. Servers in the sanctuary during the Divine Liturgy do not bend their knees, but the people, if they wish, may kneel.
18. When the Priest blesses, he places the thumb of the right hand crosswise on the ring finger, keeps the index finger straight, and slightly bends the middle and little fingers. To receive the blessing, all bow their heads and shoulders and sign themselves with the sign of the cross.
19. Regarding the opening and closing of doors and the drawing and undrawing of the curtain of the iconostasis, one must observe the following general rules:
a) The side doors always remain closed, unless someone enters or leaves through them.
b) The holy doors are opened when at the beginning of Vespers with Vigil the Priest censes, and are closed when the 103rd Psalm begins; they are opened also during all Entrances at Vespers, at Matins, at the Liturgy, and also when the Gospel is brought out and at the dismissal.
c) At Matins, the holy doors are opened before the Prokimenon, and are closed after the exclamation "By the grace and compassions"; they are opened also during the singing of the Great Doxology, and after the dismissal are closed.
d) At the Divine Liturgy, the holy doors are opened before the Little Entrance, and after the Holy Gospel are closed; they are opened again before the Great Entrance, after which they are closed; after the communion of the celebrant and deacon they are opened, and at the end of the Divine Liturgy are closed. Sometimes, however, these doors may be opened and closed more frequently.
e) During Bright Week, the holy and diaconal doors remain open, even during the communion of the celebrant[^755].
f) During an Hierarchical divine service, the holy doors are always opened.
g) The curtain of the holy doors is drawn shut for the whole Vespers and the whole Matins. At the Holy Liturgy, it is drawn shut after the Proskomedia until the end of the Little Entrance; it is drawn open again when the Deacon exclaims: "The doors, the doors" and is drawn shut at the exclamation "Holy things to the holy"; it is drawn open before the communion of the faithful and remains drawn open until the end of the Liturgy.
In some regions (and countries - ed. note) there exists a custom to open the holy doors and draw open the curtain from the beginning to the very end of the Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and St. Basil, and at the Liturgy of Presanctified Gifts - after "Let my prayer be set forth"; also at Vespers not to close them anymore after the Entrance. Let this custom not be introduced in other regions, but on the contrary, people must be accustomed everywhere to the exact observance of the rite.
20. Not the Priest alone places incense into the censer, this may also be done by a server or the Deacon and then presented to the Priest for blessing.
It is praiseworthy if the Priest, and also the Deacon, before censing, holding the censer with the right hand, makes the sign of the cross with it and, while censing a person or thing, pays it respect, bowing the head and shoulders slightly.
21. When the Priest at the divine service blesses the censer for the first time, he recites the prayer "Incense we offer to Thee," and subsequently - only the words: "Blessed is our God."
22. When putting on and kissing vestments, it is necessary to follow the prescriptions given at the beginning of the Proskomedia (see nos. 103-106); at other divine services, having left aside the corresponding prayers, one must observe the same.
23. If a Priest, having to celebrate a divine service, does not put on the sticharion, he must put on over his long garment also an outer one with wide sleeves, which is called in Greek rason, and in Slavonic - ryasa.
24. No one is permitted to put on vestments proper to a rank higher than the one to which he belongs.
25. The Deacon, while serving the Priest, stands to his right, unless explicitly prescribed otherwise. If there are two deacons, the first stands to the right, and the second - to the left of the Priest.
26. Clerics (seminarians) who do not yet have diaconal ordination are not permitted to perform the diaconal service.
27. What the Priest or Deacon exclaims, other concelebrants should not recite quietly, except for the exclamations that conclude prayers, unless prescribed otherwise.
28. The full ceremonies are explained in that part which speaks about the celebration in concelebration with one deacon. In other parts, which speak about the service with two deacons, without a Deacon, with Priest-concelebrants, only that which is proper to these parts is explained fully.
II. Rubric of Vespers without Vigil
1. In Concelebration of One Deacon
29. The Deacon, holding the sticharion with the orarion, approaches the Priest and, bowing his head, says: "Bless, Master, the sticharion with the orarion." The Priest blesses, saying: "Blessed is our God." The Deacon: "Amen," after which he puts on the sticharion and, having kissed the orarion, places it on his left shoulder.
30. The Priest, having taken upon himself the epitrachelion over the ryasa, having previously blessed it, goes out through the northern doors and, standing before the closed holy doors, makes a small bow and exclaims: "Blessed is our God." After "Our Father," He exclaims: "For Thine is the kingdom."
31. During the reading of the 103rd Psalm, the Priest before the holy doors recites quietly the Vespers (Lamp-lighting) Prayers[^756].
After the completion of the 103rd Psalm, the Deacon goes out through the northern doors, pays respect to the Priest, makes a small bow and begins: "In peace let us pray to the Lord."
The Priest, after the completion of the psalm, returns to the sanctuary before the holy table and there finishes the reading of the Vespers Prayers, if he did not finish earlier. After the exclamation "For to Thee belongs," the Deacon also, having made a small bow, returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary and stands to the right of the Priest.
32. After the completion of the Kathisma, the Deacon, having gone out through the northern doors, sings the Small Litany and, after the exclamation of the Priest "For Thine is the dominion," makes a small bow and returns into the sanctuary[^757].
33. When the Choir begins to sing "Lord, I have cried," the Deacon takes the censer and, after the Priest blesses the incense, censes the holy table from the four sides, then the icon behind the altar, the icons of the sanctuary and the Priest[^758]. After this, having gone out of the sanctuary through the northern doors[^772], he comes before the holy doors, makes a bow, censes the icons of the southern part of the iconostasis, beginning from the icon of the Savior; then, having made again a bow before the holy doors, censes the icons of the northern part, beginning from the icon of the Theotokos, then - the choirs, right and left; He censes the people from the solea, after which He returns into the sanctuary through the southern doors.
34. When the Choir begins to sing the last sticheron, the Priest puts on the phelonion, having blessed and kissed it, and, at "Glory," comes with the Deacon before the holy table. The holy doors are opened. The Deacon takes the censer and, after the Priest blesses the incense, together with him, who now lowers the phelonion, goes around the holy table, beginning from the right side and, preceded by candle-bearers, they go out through the northern doors. They stand before the holy doors: candle-bearers on opposite sides, one - near the icon of the Theotokos, the second - near the icon of the Savior, the Deacon - in the middle, and behind him - the Priest. The Priest and deacon bow their heads. The Deacon, holding the orarion with three fingers, says quietly: "Let us pray to the Lord," and the Priest recites quietly the Prayer of the Entrance "In the evening and in the morning and at noonday."
On the Eve of the Nativity of Christ and Theophany, if they fall on a Saturday or Sunday, the Deacon takes for the Entrance, besides the censer, also the Gospel.
After the Prayer of the Entrance, the Deacon, pointing with the orarion to the east, says to the Priest: "Bless, Master, the holy entrance." The Priest blesses to the east and says: "Blessed is the entrance." Then the Deacon presents to the Priest the Holy Gospel for kissing, if he has it, and after the Choir finishes the stichera, stands in the holy doors before the Priest, makes the sign of the cross with the censer or lifts the Gospel up[^759], if he has it, and exclaims: "Wisdom, arise." During the singing of "O Gladsome Light," the Deacon and priest enter the sanctuary before the holy table, and the candle-bearers return there through the side doors. Then the Deacon censes everything, as during "Lord, I have cried" (see no. 33).
After the censing and the conclusion of the hymn, the Deacon, having approached the holy doors and looking at the people, exclaims: "Let us be attentive." The Priest, turned to the west, blesses: "Peace be to all." The Deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive," and the Priest, remaining there with hands crossed on his chest, waits for the conclusion of the Prokimenon. Then, if there were readings, the Priest makes a small bow before the throne and goes to the seat, and the Deacon remains near the holy doors and before the title of each reading exclaims to the people: "Wisdom," and after the title, also to the people: "Let us be attentive."
35. After the readings, the Priest returns to the throne, and the Deacon, having paid him respect, goes around the holy table, exits through the northern doors and, having stood before the closed holy doors, exclaims the litany "Let us all say," and the Priest: "For a merciful." After "Vouchsafe, O Lord," the Deacon sings the litany "Let us complete." The Priest exclaims: "For Thou Art a good God." Choir: "Amen." The Priest blesses: "Peace be to all." Choir: "And to Thy spirit." Deacon: "Bow your heads unto the Lord." Choir: "To Thee, O Lord." While the Priest recites the Prayer at the Bowing of Heads, all bow their heads until the very exclamation "Blessed and glorified be." After the exclamation, the Deacon returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary.
36. The Choir begins to sing the Aposticha stichera, then - "Now lettest Thou," the Trisagion and, after "Our Father," the Priest exclaims: "For Thine is the kingdom."
After the Troparia, the holy doors are opened. The Deacon goes out through the southern doors, stands near the icon of the Savior, looking at the people and raising the orarion with three fingers of the right hand, exclaims: "Wisdom." Choir: "Bless." Priest: "Christ our God, the Existing One, is blessed." Choir: "Amen. Establish, O God." Priest: "Most Holy Theotokos, save us." Choir: "More honorable than the Cherubim." Priest, turned to the east: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God." Choir: "Glory, Both now," "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Bless." The Priest, turned to the people and standing in the holy doors, says the dismissal[^760].
When the Priest exclaims the dismissal, the Deacon raises the orarion. After this, the Priest returns into the sanctuary through the holy doors, and the Deacon - through the southern ones and, having closed the holy doors, they make a small bow before the throne and take off their vestments.
2. In Concelebration of Two Deacons
37. After the completion of the 103rd Psalm, the 1st deacon goes out through the northern doors, makes a small bow, pays respect to the Priest and exclaims the Great Litany, and after the Priest's exclamation "For to Thee belongs," makes a small bow and returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary.
38. After the Kathisma, the 2nd deacon goes out through the northern doors, exclaims the Small Litany, and after the exclamation "For Thine is the dominion," makes a small bow and returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary (see no. 32, note).
39. When the Choir begins to sing "Lord, I have cried," the deacons take censers and, having put in incense, approach the Priest. The Priest blesses the incense and both deacons cense: the throne - first from the front, then the 1st deacon - from the right side, and the 2nd - from the left, and again together - from the east, then - the icon behind the altar, other icons of the sanctuary and the Priest. After this, they go out of the sanctuary, the 1st deacon - through the southern, and the 2nd - through the northern, come before the holy doors and, having made a bow, cense the icons of the iconostasis, the 1st deacon begins from the icon of the Savior, and the 2nd - from the icon of the Theotokos, then the 1st deacon - the right choir, and the 2nd - the left. They cense the people from the solea, the 1st - those on the right, and the 2nd - those on the left side. Then they return into the sanctuary, the 1st deacon - through the southern, and the 2nd - through the northern doors.
40. When the Choir begins the last sticheron, the Priest with the deacons come at "Glory" (see no. 34) before the holy table. The holy doors are opened. The deacons take censers, the Priest blesses the incense. Then they go out through the northern doors: first - the 2nd deacon, after him - the 1st, and lastly - the Priest. They stand before the holy doors: the 2nd deacon - to the left of the Priest, and the 1st - to the right. The 1st deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord," the Priest recites the Prayer of the Entrance, then the 1st deacon, who carries also, if need be, the Gospel, says, pointing with the orarion to the east: "Bless, Master, the holy entrance," and after the blessing both deacons enter through the holy doors, stand: in front - the 2nd deacon, and behind him - the 1st. When the Choir finishes the stichera, the 1st deacon, making the sign of the cross with the censer or lifting the Holy Gospel, exclaims: "Wisdom, arise." After this, they enter the sanctuary and cense everything, as at "Lord, I have cried" (see nos. 34 and 39).
After the censing and the conclusion of the hymn "O Gladsome Light," the deacons approach the holy doors, turn to the people and the 1st exclaims: "Let us be attentive." Priest: "Peace be to all." 2nd deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." The Choir sings the Prokimenon. Then, before the title of each reading, the 1st Deacon exclaims to the people: "Wisdom," and the 2nd, after the reading of the title, likewise to the people: "Let us be attentive"[^761].
41. After the readings, the Priest returns before the holy table, the deacons bow to the Priest and go out through their doors, that is the 2nd deacon - through the northern, and the 1st - through the southern, stand before the holy doors and the 1st exclaims the litany "Let us all say," and the 2nd - "Let us complete," after which the 1st deacon: "Bow your heads unto the Lord." After the exclamation, the deacons return through their doors into the sanctuary and stand to the right and left of the Priest (see no. 36, note).
42. After the Troparia, while the holy doors are open, the deacons go out, each - through his doors, and stand before the holy doors, one - to the right, and the other - to the left. The 1st deacon, standing near the icon of the Savior, looks towards the people, raises the orarion and exclaims: "Wisdom." When the Priest says the dismissal, both deacons raise their oraria and hold them raised until the conclusion of the dismissal, then return through their doors into the sanctuary and, having closed the holy doors, make a small bow before the throne and take off their holy vestments.
3. Without a Deacon
43. A Priest celebrating Vespers without a Deacon does and recites everything that belongs to the Deacon, with the exception of the calls "Let us pray to the Lord," "Bless," observing the following:
44. He sings the Great Litany before the holy doors and after the exclamation returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary.
45. After the Kathisma, He sings the Small Litany. At "Lord, I have cried" He censes, as was noted (comp. no. 33). After the censing, He enters through the southern doors into the sanctuary and gives away the censer.
46. For the Entrance, he takes the censer or the Holy Gospel, goes around the holy table from the right side, exits through the northern doors, bows his head before the holy doors and recites the Prayer of the Entrance "In the evening and in the morning"; with his right hand he blesses the entrance, kisses the Gospel, if he has it, and then exclaims: "Wisdom, arise," making the sign of the cross with the censer or lifting the Holy Gospel with both hands, and returns through the holy doors into the sanctuary. During the singing of "O Gladsome Light," he censes, as was noted (see no. 33), returns into the sanctuary and stands before the throne.
47. After the hymn "O Gladsome Light," he approaches the holy doors and, looking at the people, says: "Let us be attentive" and blesses the people: "Peace be to all" and adds: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." Then, if there be readings, he turns to the throne, goes from the right side behind the throne and exclaims before the title of each paremia: "Wisdom," and after the title: "Let us be attentive."
48. After the readings, he returns to the holy table and exclaims before it the litanies "Let us all say" and "Let us complete."
49. After the Troparia, he exclaims himself, having turned to the people: "Wisdom" and, standing in the holy doors, says the dismissal, as was noted (see no. 36, note).
4. In Concelebration of Priests
50. Concelebrating priests, whose number should be even, put on before the Entrance only epitrachelia and phelons over their ryasas and stand on the sides of the holy table, and not before it, where only the principal celebrant and deacons stand; they stand according to the order of their dignity or ordination: the first priest - on the right side of the throne, the second - on the left, the third - again on the right, and so on.
51. For the Entrance, all go out, having made a small bow, through the northern doors; they lower their phelons and hands down and stand, in front - the younger ones, in a double row before the holy doors, facing one another, and the principal celebrant stands in the middle, behind all, and recites the Prayer of the Entrance himself (see no. 34).
After the call of the Deacon "Wisdom, arise," all enter immediately after the Deacon through the holy doors and take their places on the sides of the holy table. During the censing of the holy table by the Deacon, the concelebrating priests move away slightly from it.
52. The exclamation "For a merciful" is said by the principal celebrant, and "For Thou Art a good God" and others may be exclaimed by the 1st concelebrant, but "Blessed and glorified be" - the principal celebrant takes. After the dismissal, all make a small bow before the holy table, depart and take off the sacred vestments.
III. Rubric of Vespers with Vigil
1. In Concelebration of One Deacon
53. The Deacon, holding the sticharion and orarion, approaches the Priest, bows his head and says: "Bless, Master." The Priest blesses, saying: "Blessed is our God." Choir: "Amen." The Deacon puts on the sticharion, kisses the orarion and places it on his left shoulder.
54. The Priest puts on the ryasa the epitrachelion, having previously blessed it, and puts on the phelonion, having blessed and kissed [it], and opens the holy doors. The Deacon goes out through the northern doors, stands with a lighted candle before the holy doors and says: "Bless, Master," after which He returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary.
Then the Priest takes the censer, blesses it and censes the holy table from the four sides, then - the icon behind the altar and other icons of the sanctuary, the table of oblation, the icons of the iconostasis, first - of the right, and then - of the left part, the choirs and the people, as prescribed. During the censing, the Deacon goes before the Priest with a candle and, having returned before the holy doors, says quietly: "Bless, Master" (see nos. 33, 34, 39).
Then both enter the sanctuary: the Deacon - through the southern, and the Priest - through the holy doors, give away the censer and candle, and the Priest before the holy table exclaims: "Glory to the Holy, Consubstantial." Choir: "Amen," "Come, let us worship" (3) and the 103rd Psalm "Bless the Lord, O my soul" (see nos. 31, 37).
55. Elsewhere, however, there exists a custom that the Deacon, after "Bless, Master," returns into the sanctuary and, having taken the censer and received the blessing from the Priest, censes everything himself, and the Priest stands at this time before the throne.
56. The Priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion, goes out in the epitrachelion alone through the northern doors before the holy doors and there reads the Vespers Prayers.
Everything else, until the Prayer at the Bowing of Heads, takes place as at Vespers in concelebration with one deacon (see no. 31).
57. After the exclamation "Blessed and glorified be the dominion of Thy kingdom," the Priest with the cross in his hand, and the Deacon - with the censer go out through the northern doors or, if there exists a custom and the holy doors be open, the Priest goes out[^762] through the holy, and the Deacon - through the northern doors. From here they go into the narthex or, if there is none, to a place near the entrance doors of the temple, preceded by the Choir and candle-bearers. The Deacon, having received the blessing of the incense, censes the holy icons, if they be in the narthex, then - the Priest, the Choir and the people. After the completion of the Litiya stichera, the Deacon exclaims the litany "O God, save Thy people."
At the end, the Priest exclaims: "Hear us, O God" and blesses the people: "Peace be to all." The Deacon exclaims: "Bow your heads," the Priest with a raised voice recites the prayer "O Master, Great in mercy" and, after its conclusion, all return into the temple to the tetrapod, on which are prepared for blessing five loaves, wheat, wine and oil; the Priest and deacon stand before it, and the candle-bearers - to the right and left of them on opposite sides.
During the singing of the Aposticha Troparion, the Deacon, after the blessing of the incense, censes the tetrapod from the four sides and only the Rector and the Priest.
58. After the call of the Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord" and the response of the Choir: "Lord, have mercy," the Priest takes one loaf and blesses the other loaves with it, and then puts it down and with a raised voice exclaims the prayer "O Lord Jesus Christ our God." When He says "Do Thou Thyself bless," He points with His right hand to the loaves, wheat, wine and oil[^763].
59. After the completion of the prayer, the Choir sings: "Blessed be the name of the Lord," and the Priest enters with the Deacon through the southern doors into the sanctuary, or the Priest - through the holy (see no. 57), and the Deacon - through the southern, and they stand before the holy table. After this, the Choir reads the 33rd Psalm "I will bless the Lord" until "shall not be deprived of any good thing."
After all this, the holy doors are opened, if they were not yet opened, and the Priest blesses the people from the holy doors: "The blessing of the Lord be upon you." Choir: "Amen," and the dismissal begins from the call of the Deacon: "Wisdom," as noted about this at the end of the rite of Vespers without Vigil (see no. 36, note).
60. If Matins is added directly to Vespers with Vigil, the Priest after the exclamation "The blessing of the Lord be upon you" closes the holy doors and takes off the phelonion.
Reader: "Glory to God in the highest" (3), "O Lord, open my lips" (2) and after this - the Six Psalms.
The Priest goes out through the northern doors before the holy doors and recites quietly the Matins Prayers.
2. In Concelebration of Two Deacons
61. The Priest puts on the epitrachelion and puts on the phelonion, and the deacons - sticharia and oraria. The Priest opens the holy doors, and the 1st deacon with a lighted candle goes out through the southern doors, stands before the holy [doors] and, having made a small bow, calls: "Command," and through the southern doors returns again into the sanctuary (see no. 54).
After this the Priest, preceded by the 1st deacon, censes as noted above and at the end says in a half-voice: "Lord, bless."
After this, the Deacon returns through the southern, and the Priest - through the holy doors into the sanctuary and the Priest, having given away the censer, exclaims before the holy table: "Glory to the Holy, Consubstantial." Choir: "Amen," "Come, let us worship" (3) and the 103rd Psalm "Bless the Lord, O my soul."
Elsewhere there exists a custom that the deacons take the censers and, after the blessing of the incense by the Priest, cense themselves (see no. 55), while the Priest during this time stands before the throne.
62. The Priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion and in the epitrachelion alone goes out through the northern doors before the holy doors, where he reads the Vespers Prayers (see no. 31, note).
Everything else takes place as presented in the rite of Vespers without Vigil in concelebration with two deacons (see no. 37).
63. After the exclamation "Blessed and glorified be," the Priest goes out with the cross in his hand, and the deacons - with censers through the northern doors or, if according to custom the holy doors are open, the Priest - through the holy (see no. 57), and the deacons - through their doors. From here they proceed to the narthex or, if there is none, to a place near the entrance to the temple, preceded by the Choir and candle-bearers. The deacons, after the blessing of the incense by the Priest, cense, both from their side, the holy icons, if they be in the narthex, the Priest, the Choir and the present people. After the completion of the Litiya stichera, the deacons sing alternately the prayers:
1st deacon: "O God, save Thy people."
2nd deacon: "Again we pray for the most holy ecumenical."
1st deacon: "Again we pray for the most reverend archbishop."
Priest: "Hear us, O God," "Peace be to all."
2nd deacon: "Bow your heads." After the exclamation they return to the temple of the faithful.
64. During the singing of the Aposticha Troparion, the deacons cense the tetrapod from the four sides: first both - from the front, then the 1st deacon - from the right side, the 2nd deacon - from the left, then both go behind the tetrapod and cense it from the east, and after this - only the Rector and the Priest.
65. Before the blessing of the loaves the 1st deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord."
66. After the completion of the prayer the Choir sings: "Blessed be the name of the Lord," and the Priest with the 1st deacon - through the southern, and the 2nd deacon - through the northern doors enter the sanctuary and stand before the holy table. The Choir reads the 33rd Psalm "I will bless the Lord" until "shall not be deprived of any good thing."
After this the holy doors are opened, if they were not yet opened, and the Priest blesses the people: "The blessing of the Lord be upon you." Choir: "Amen." The dismissal follows, which the 1st deacon begins: "Wisdom" (see no. 36, note).
3. Without a Deacon
67. The Priest in epitrachelion and phelonion opens the holy doors, censes the holy table from four sides and everything else, as noted (see no. 54). Turning to the holy doors he says in a half-voice: "Lord, bless."
68. During the reading of the 103rd Psalm, the Priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion and in the epitrachelion alone goes out through the northern doors, reads before the holy doors the Vespers (Lamp-lighting) Prayers, there also he sings the Great Litany.
Everything else takes place as presented in the rubric of Vespers in concelebration with one deacon, with the fact that the Priest exclaims all other litanies before the holy table.
69. After the exclamation "Blessed and glorified be," the Priest goes out with the cross in his hands through the northern or, if there exists a custom, holy doors. From here he goes to the very narthex or to a place near the entrance doors. The Choir and candle-bearers also gather in the narthex. The Priest takes the censer, censes the icons, if they be in the narthex, the Choir and the people. After the completion of the Litiya stichera he himself reads the litanies. After the completion of this, he returns to the temple, approaches the tetrapod, censes it from four sides and after this - only the Rector.
Everything else takes place as presented in the rubric of Vespers with Vigil in concelebration with one deacon (see no. 36, note, no. 59).
4. In Concelebration of Priests
70. The concelebrants make the Entrance and after it return to the throne, as noted before in the rubric of Vespers without Vigil (see no. 51). Having made a small bow, they do not depart, but wait for the Litiya. The exclamation "For a merciful" is exclaimed by the principal celebrant, another "For Thou Art a good God" may be exclaimed by the 1st concelebrant, but the exclamation "Blessed and glorified be the dominion of Thy kingdom" - the principal celebrant.
71. Then, during the procession at the Litiya, all make a small bow before the holy table and go out, in front - the younger ones, whether through the northern, or, if there exists a custom, through the holy doors, having lowered their phelons and hands down. In the narthex or at the place near the church doors they stand in two rows, one beside the other, and the principal celebrant - in the middle, behind all. The Deacon or deacons stand near the principal celebrant.
If only one deacon censes, then, having censed the icons in the narthex, he censes first the principal celebrant, then - the concelebrants on the right, and finally those standing to the left of the principal celebrant. If both deacons cense, each censes those standing on his side. If there are no deacons, the principal celebrant censes the concelebrants, beginning from those standing on his right hand.
The exclamation "Hear us, O God" is exclaimed by the principal celebrant.
72. At the blessing of loaves, the concelebrants are arranged thus:
After the blessing of loaves, all go in a double row, in front - the younger ones, to the iconostasis and stand before the solea, and the celebrant approaches the holy doors and blesses the people: "The blessing of the Lord be upon you." After the dismissal, the concelebrating priests return with the younger ones in front into the sanctuary and, having made a small bow before the throne, depart; after this they take off the sacred vestments (see no. 60 and no. 36, note).
73. If after Vespers follows directly Matins, then they, having taken off the sacred vestments, do not go out of the sanctuary, but remain on the seats under the apse until the Polyeleos itself.
IV. Rubric of Matins in Sundays and Feasts
1. In Concelebration of One Deacon
74. If before this there was no Vigil, then Matins begins thus[^764]:
75. The Priest puts on the ryasa the epitrachelion, having previously blessed it, goes before the holy doors and begins: "Blessed is our God." Choir: "Amen," "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee," "O Heavenly King," Trisagion, "Most Holy Trinity," "Our Father." Priest: "For Thine is the kingdom." Choir: "Amen," "Lord, have mercy" (12), "Glory, Both now," "Come, let us worship" (3). The Priest enters the sanctuary through the southern doors, recites the Prayer of the Censer, takes the censer, censes the throne from the four sides, the icon behind the altar and other icons of the sanctuary. Then he goes out of the sanctuary through the northern doors, comes before the holy doors and, bowing, censes the icons of the southern part of the iconostasis, beginning from the image of the Savior, the icons of the northern part, beginning from the icon of the Theotokos, then - the choirs, right and left. He censes the people either from the solea or crossing the whole temple, while the Choir reads the 20th(19th) Psalm "The Lord hear Thee" and the 21st(20th) "The King shall joy." When the Choir begins the Trisagion, the Priest returns before the holy doors, censes them and after "Our Father" exclaims: "For Thine is the kingdom," enters the sanctuary through the southern doors, stands before the holy table and, after the completion of the troparia "O Lord, save Thy people," exclaims the Litany for Emperors. After the exclamation "For a merciful," Choir: "Amen," "In the name of the Lord, bless, father."
The Priest exclaims[^765]: "Glory to the Holy, Consubstantial." Choir: "Amen," "Glory to God in the highest" (3) with small bows and "O Lord, open my lips" (2). The Six Psalms are read.
76. During the reading of the Six Psalms[^766] the Priest, standing before the holy table, begins to recite the Matins Prayers. After the first three psalms, he goes out through the northern doors and, having stood before the holy doors, continues to read the Matins Prayers. After the completion of the psalms, the Priest responds to the bow of the Deacon and, having returned through the southern doors into the sanctuary, stands before the holy table.
At the end of the Six Psalms, the Deacon, dressed in the sticharion with the orarion, goes out through the northern doors, pays respect to the Priest, stands on his usual place and exclaims the Great Litany. The Priest exclaims: "For to Thee belongs." During the singing by the Choir of "God is the Lord," the Deacon recites the verses and, after a small bow, returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary.
77. After the Troparia, the Reader reads the regular Kathisma, after which the Deacon [exclaims] before the holy doors - the Small Litany, and the Priest exclaims: "For Thine is the dominion." Then the Reader reads the second regular Kathisma, the Deacon - the second Small Litany, and the Priest - the exclamation "For Thou Art a good God."
After the Troparia "The Angelic Council," if it is Sunday, or after the Magnification [Velychannya], if it is a feast, the Deacon again reads the Small Litany, and the Priest exclaims: "For blessed."
78. After the Gradual [Gradual], the holy doors are opened, and the Deacon approaches the holy doors and, looking at the people, exclaims: "Let us be attentive." The Priest, dressed in the phelonion, blesses the people: "Peace be to all." Deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." The Choir sings the Prokimenon.
Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord." Choir: "Lord, have mercy." The Priest exclaims: "For Holy Art Thou, our God." The Deacon censes the holy table from the four sides and everything else, according to custom (see no. 33). Choir: "Let everything that has breath praise the Lord." The Deacon recites both verses, and the Choir repeats: "Let everything that has breath," after which the Deacon: "And that we may be vouchsafed." Choir: "Lord, have mercy" (3). The Priest takes the Gospel, goes out before the holy doors, stands at a slight distance before them on the solea, places the Gospel on the analogion and reads it, turned to the people. Deacon: "Wisdom, arise, let us hear the Holy Gospel," and the Priest blesses: "Peace be to all." Choir: "And to Thy spirit." Priest: "The reading from the Holy Gospel according to (Name)." Deacon: "Let us be attentive." The Priest reads the Matins Gospel.
79. After the reading, the Priest kisses the closed book and carries it to the middle of the temple, where he places it on the tetrapod, and he himself returns through the holy doors into the sanctuary. The Deacon reads "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ," if it is Sunday, or the Reader - the 50th Psalm "Have mercy on me, O God."
After the sticheron, the Deacon [is] at his usual place: "O God, save Thy people." Choir: "Lord, have mercy" (12) and the Priest exclaims: "By the grace and compassions." Choir: "Amen." The Canon begins. The holy doors, if there was no Vigil, are closed.
80. If there was a Vigil, the Priest after the exclamation "By the grace," holding the cross in his hands, goes out through the holy [doors], and the Deacon with the oil, blessed at Vespers, and the anointing brush, - through the northern doors and they stand on the right side of the tetrapod. There the Priest anoints crosswise the forehead of everyone who approaches to kiss the Holy Gospel. After the completion of the anointing [Myrovanne] they return to the sanctuary: the Priest - through the holy, and the Deacon - through the southern doors and, having closed the holy doors, the Priest takes off the phelonion.
81. After the third and sixth Odes, the Deacon sings the Small Litany either before the holy doors, or near the tetrapod, if the anointing was not yet finished, and the Priest exclaims the exclamation either from the sanctuary, or from the tetrapod.
After the singing of the Katavasia of the eighth Ode, the Deacon takes the censer and, having stood before the icon of the Theotokos, says: "The Theotokos and Mother of Light let us magnify in songs" and, having returned through the southern doors into the sanctuary, censes the holy table from four sides and everything else, according to the prescription (see no. 33).
After the ninth Ode and after the recitation by the Choir of "It is truly meet," if it is not Sunday, but if it is Sunday or a feast, after the singing of the Heirmos, the Deacon exclaims from his place the Small Litany. The Priest exclaims: "For all the powers of heaven praise Thee." The Choir sings the Exaposteilarion.
82. After the Praises stichera, at "Glory," the Deacon opens the holy doors. The Priest in the phelonion stands before the throne, the Deacon stands to his right and, after the completion of the last sticheron, the Priest, turned to the east, exclaims: "Glory to Thee, Who Hast shown us the Light." The Great Doxology is sung. Then, also according to custom, the Troparion is recited, and the Priest, preceded by the Deacon, carries the Holy Gospel from the tetrapod into the sanctuary and places it on the holy table.
83. After this, the Deacon stands at his usual place and exclaims the litanies "Have mercy on us, O God" and "Let us complete." The Priest blesses the people and exclaims: "Peace be to all." Choir: "And to Thy spirit." Deacon: "Bow your heads unto the Lord." Choir: "To Thee, O Lord." The Priest recites quietly the prayer "O Holy Lord," after which He exclaims: "For Thine it is." The dismissal follows, which the Deacon begins: "Wisdom" (see no. 36).
84. After the dismissal, the Reader immediately begins the 1st Hour: "Come, let us worship" (3) and the psalms. After "Our Father," the Priest in the epitrachelion: "For Thine is the kingdom." Reader - Kontakion and "Lord, have mercy" (40). The Priest goes out of the sanctuary through the northern doors and before the holy [doors], turned to the east, loudly: "Thou Who at all times". Reader: "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Glory, Both now", "More honorable than the Cherubim", "In the name of the Lord, bless, father." Priest: "God be merciful to us." Reader: "Amen." Priest recites the prayer "O Christ, the True Light", "Glory to Thee, O Christ God." Reader: "Glory, Both now", "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Bless." The Priest imparts the Small Dismissal, returns into the sanctuary and takes off the epitrachelion.
2. In Concelebration of Two Deacons
85. At the end of the Six Psalms, the 1st deacon goes out through the northern doors and exclaims the Great Litany, as well as the verses at "God is the Lord" and, having made a small bow, returns into the sanctuary through the southern doors.
After the first Kathisma the 2nd deacon, and after the second Kathisma the 1st deacon, sing the Small Litany.
After the Troparia "The Angelic Council" or after the Magnifications, the 2nd deacon likewise sings the Small Litany.
After the Gradual [Gradual], the 1st deacon: "Let us be attentive." Priest: "Peace be to all." 2nd deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." 1st deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord." Both deacons cense the holy table, the iconostasis, the choirs and the people, as noted in the rubric of Vespers in concelebration with two deacons (see no. 40). At "Let everything that has breath," the 1st deacon recites the first verse, and the 2nd deacon - the second.
86. For the anointing of the faithful, the 1st deacon goes out with the Priest, and the 2nd exclaims the Small Litany after the third Ode, and also - after the sixth Ode.
After the Katavasia of the 8th Ode, the 1st Deacon takes the censer, goes out through the northern doors, stands before the icon of the Theotokos and calls: "The Theotokos and Mother of Light," then returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary and, together with the 2nd deacon, censes the throne and everything else, as noted above (see no. 39), and after the censing they return into the sanctuary: the 1st deacon - through the southern, and the 2nd - through the northern doors.
87. After the ninth Ode, the 1st Deacon exclaims the Small Litany.
88. After the Praises stichera, the holy doors are opened. The 1st deacon stands before the holy table to the right of the Priest, and the 2nd - to the left. After the Great Doxology, all, having made a small bow, go to the tetrapod, the Priest takes the Holy Gospel and, preceded by the deacons, returns into the sanctuary.
88. After this, the deacons go out: the 1st Deacon exclaims the first litany "Have mercy on us, O God," and the 2nd - the second "Let us complete." 1st deacon: "Bow your heads unto the Lord." The dismissal follows, which the 1st deacon begins: "Wisdom" (see no. 36, note).
3. Without a Deacon
89. A Priest who serves Matins without a Deacon does and says everything that belongs to the Deacon, considering this:
90. After the completion of the Six Psalms, He does not return into the sanctuary, but, standing before the holy doors, exclaims the Great Litany and its exclamation: "For to Thee belongs," as well as the verses during the singing by the Choir of "God is the Lord." After the completion of this, He makes a small bow and returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary.
It should be noted that when the Priest does not have enough time to recite all the Matins Prayers before the iconostasis, he may finish them in the sanctuary during the reading of the Kathismata.
After the Prokimenon, He Himself exclaims: "Let us pray to the Lord"; reads the verses at "Let everything that has breath"; before the reading of the Gospel, exclaims: "Let us be attentive," and after the Gospel reads "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ."
After the 3rd and 6th Odes of the Canon - Small Litanies and exclaims from the throne or from the place where he anoints.
After the anointing, he returns through the holy doors into the sanctuary and takes off the phelonion.
91. After the Katavasia of the 8th Ode, he goes out in the epitrachelion through the northern doors, stands before the icon of the Theotokos and calls: "The Theotokos and Mother of Light," then censes, as noted above (see no. 33). After the censing, he returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary, exclaims the Small Litany and its exclamation.
92. After the Praises stichera, at "Glory," He puts on the phelonion, opens the holy doors and, after the last sticheron, exclaims: "Glory to Thee, Who Hast shown us the Light." Everything else takes place as was presented (see nos. 82-83).
93. After the dismissal, the Priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion and the 1st Hour begins.
4. In Concelebration of Priests
94. Concelebrants, in an even number, put on epitrachelia over their ryasas and put on phelons during the reading of the Kathisma and stand on the sides of the holy table, as at Vespers (see no. 50). During the singing of the Polyeleos, all go out, having made a small bow, through the holy doors, having lowered the phelonion and hands down, in front - the younger ones. Two first ones carry the icon of the feast or saint, if it has not yet been placed on the left side of the tetrapod between both choirs, and place it on the tetrapod; all stand on the sides of the tetrapod in two rows, facing one another, the principal celebrant stands in the middle before the tetrapod, and to his right - the Deacon.
95. Then all sing the Magnification. When the Choir repeats the Magnification, the Priest, preceded by the Deacon with a lighted candle, censes from four sides the icon of the feast or saint on the tetrapod, the holy table, the sanctuary, the iconostasis, the concelebrants, both choirs, the people and once more the icon of the feast, but only from the front. If, however, the usual censing takes place before the Gospel, then at the Magnification the Priest censes only the icon itself. Choir: "Glory" and again the Magnification. Then the celebrant and concelebrants sing the Magnification once more.
96. After the Magnifications all, the younger ones - in front, return through the holy doors into the sanctuary before the holy table. After the Gospel all, having made a small bow, depart and take off their vestments.
Shortening of Matins[^767]
1. Beginning
- The Priest, having put on the epitrachelion, censes as usual (see at "Lord, I have cried," no. 75).
- Then he exclaims: "Glory to the Holy," and the Choir recites everything else and the 142nd Psalm on Sunday or the regular one - on feasts.
- After the Great Litany - "God is the Lord," Troparion of the Sunday or Feast, Theotokion according to the tone of the Troparion.
2. Sung Kathismata
- Regular Kathismata with Sessional Hymns are not taken, but sung ones are taken thus: "The Angelic Council" - only on Sundays, "Praise the name of the Lord" (Polyeleos) - only on feasts, "By the waters of Babylon" - only on the Sundays of Great Lent.
- The Priest at the appointed time puts on the phelonion, opens the holy doors and exclaims: "Peace be to all." Then he censes. If there was censing at the Magnification, then before the Reading of the Gospel there will be no censing.
- Prokimenon, "Let everything that has breath" - according to the tone of the season.
3. Bringing out the Gospel
- The Priest, having read the Gospel, carries the Holy Book out to the tetrapod, accompanied by two candle-bearers.
- The Reader, if there is no deacon, reads "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ."
- All go to kiss the Gospel. If there was a Litiya, then the anointing takes place (see no. 80).
- Having returned to the throne, the Priest recites the prayer "O God, save." After this He does not close the holy doors in view of the shortening of Matins.
4. Magnification of the Theotokos
- Having recited the prayer "O God, save," the Priest takes the censer and goes out before the icon of the Theotokos.
- There he exclaims: "The Theotokos and Mother of Light," censes the icon, then returns into the sanctuary and censes everything, as usual.
- The Choir sings "More honorable than the Cherubim" at the beginning and at the end of the verses, which both choirs recite alternately.
5. Laudatory Prayers
- Psalms 148, 149 and 150 are sung singly, in turn.
- After "Most Blessed" the Priest exclaims: "Glory to Thee, Who Hast shown us the Light." At the Great Doxology there will be no censing.
- During the singing of the Troparion, the Priest carries the Gospel back, and after the completion - immediately says the dismissal.
Beginning of Paschal Matins
At Paschal Matins the censing takes place with special solemnity. The servers, having put on the best vestments, as at the Divine Liturgy, go out before the throne in the usual order and make a bow all together. The principal celebrant gives the Gospel to the 1st server, and to the 2nd - the icon of the Resurrection of Christ, He Himself takes the cross with His left hand, and with the right (from the Deacon) - the censer. He censes first the throne, and afterwards - the servers. Then the principal celebrant, having given the censer to the Deacon, stands at his place. All bow before the throne and turn to the east to go out to the narthex. The exit takes place according to the usual order of seniority under the peeling of bells and with the singing of the hymn "Thy Resurrection, O Christ Savior." And the order is such: candle-bearers, priests, deacons with lighted candles, and behind them - the principal celebrant. All are also given lighted candles. In the narthex all stand before the closed church doors.
Here the principal celebrant takes the censer from the Deacon and censes the icons of the narthex, the kliroses and the people. The Deacon precedes him the entire time with a lighted candle. Then the principal celebrant returns before the doors and censes the Deacon; and then the latter, having taken the censer from the principal celebrant, censes him and immediately gives the censer back to the principal celebrant, who thrice censes the doors and then exclaims: "Glory to the Holy." After "Amen," the principal celebrant with the concelebrants sings thrice "Christ is risen" and the verses "Let God arise," to which the people respond with the song "Christ is risen." After the last "Christ is risen," the principal celebrant opens the doors (Among us he knocks thrice with the cross) and enters the church, and behind him all the servers and people (see no. 71; Liturgicon, pp. 141-146).
V. Rubric of the Divine Liturgy
of St. John Chrysostom and St. Basil the Great
1. In Concelebration of One Deacon
97. According to the ancient custom of the Eastern Church, only one Holy Liturgy may be celebrated at the same holy table. However, one may depart from this rule if the Divine Liturgy must be repeated for the benefit of the faithful. If there is one or several secondary churches in the parish, then the more solemn Liturgy is celebrated in the main sanctuary, and other liturgies should be celebrated rather in the side sanctuaries.
98. The Eucharistic bread does not absolutely have to be baked on the day the Holy Sacrifice is offered. The same bread can be kept for several days and used at several liturgies, provided that all the ceremonies of the Proskomedia are observed over it or over a part of it, cutting the bread and removing the Lamb and particles according to the prescription. Also, it is not necessary to always use five prosphora, if the Lamb and all particles can be taken from one and the same prosphora. The custom of using five prosphora may be kept, if one pleases, when celebrating more solemn liturgies (see no. 179).
99. The Priest who wishes to serve the Sacrament must first of all be reconciled with all and hold nothing against anyone, keep his heart as far as possible from evil thoughts, be continent already from the evening and keep the fast until the very time of the service and prepare himself for the offering of the sacrifice by prayers (see no. 190).
100. At the prescribed time, the Priest enters the church and, together with the Deacon, bows three times before the holy doors to the east.
Then the Deacon says in a low voice: "Bless, Master." Priest: "Blessed is our God." Deacon: "Amen."
And the Deacon begins to say: "Glory to Thee, our God," "O Heavenly King," "Holy God" (3), "Glory, Both now," "Most Holy Trinity," "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Glory, Both now," "Our Father." Priest: "For Thine is the kingdom." Deacon: "Amen."
Then they recite together: "Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us," Glory: "Lord, have mercy on us," Both now: "The door of compassion."
They approach the icon of the Savior, venerate it with a small bow and, kissing it, say: "We worship Thine immaculate Icon."
Having bowed before the holy doors, in the same manner they venerate and kiss the icon of the Theotokos, saying the troparion "Forasmuch as Thou Art a well-spring of compassion."
101. After this the Priest and deacon return before the holy doors, and the Priest, bowing his head, recites the prayer "O Lord, stretch forth Thy hand."
Then the Priest and deacon bow also to the right and left choirs and go into the sanctuary: the Priest - through the southern, and the Deacon - through the northern doors, saying: "I will enter into Thy house" (see no. 178).
102. Having entered the sanctuary, they make three small bows before the holy table and kiss: the Priest - the Holy Gospel, and the Deacon - the holy table and, if there exists a custom, both - the altar cross. Having arrived at the place where the sacred vestments are kept, each takes his sticharion in his hands and makes three small bows to the east, saying to himself: "O God, be merciful to me a sinner."
103. Then the Deacon approaches the Priest and, holding in his right hand the sticharion with the orarion and cuffs and bowing his head, says: "Bless, Master, the sticharion with the orarion." And the Priest blesses, saying: "Blessed is our God." Deacon: "Amen."
104. Then the Deacon withdraws and, at some place in the sanctuary, puts on the sticharion, praying thus: "My soul shall rejoice in the Lord." Having kissed the orarion, He places it on His left shoulder. Putting the cuff on the right hand, He says: "Thy right hand, O Lord," and on the left: "Thy hands have made me."
After this he goes to the table of oblation, unfolds the antimension [iliton], places the diskos on the left side, and the chalice - on the right, and prepares also the spear, star-cover, veils and purificators for the holy offering of the sacrifice.
105. The Priest, in the right part of the sanctuary, vests thus: having taken the sticharion in his left hand, he makes three small bows to the east, as was said about this, and, blessing it, says: "Blessed is our God." Then He puts it on, saying: "My soul shall rejoice in the Lord." Having taken the epitrachelion and blessed it, He puts it on Himself and says: "Blessed is God, Who pours out His grace." Having taken the zone [belt], He girds Himself, saying: "Blessed is God, Who girds me with strength." Putting the cuff on the right hand, He says: "Thy right hand, O Lord," and on the left: "Thy hands have made me." Then He takes the epigonation [nabedrenyk], if He has one, and, having blessed and kissed it, hangs it over His right knee, saying: "Gird Thy sword." After this, having taken and blessed the phelonion, He kisses it and says: "Thy priests, O Lord."
106. One may vest also in the sacristy.
107. Dressed thus in vestments, the Priest and deacon go to the table of oblation, where they wash their hands, saying: "I will wash my hands among the innocent."
108. Then they make three small bows before the table of oblation and say: "O God, be merciful to me a sinner," "Thou Hast redeemed us."
The Deacon says: "Bless, Master," and the Priest begins: "Blessed is our God." Deacon: "Amen."
After this the Priest takes a prosphora with his left hand, and with his right - the holy spear, makes with it the sign of the cross three times over the seal of the prosphora and says thrice: "In remembrance of our Lord and God," immediately thrusts the spear into the right side of the seal, cuts and says: "As a sheep led to the slaughter," and into the left: "And as a blameless lamb," into the upper side of the seal: "In His humiliation," into the lower: "And Who shall declare His generation." And the Deacon, observing piously this mystery, says each time: "Let us pray to the Lord," holding the orarion with His right hand. Then He says: "Take up, Master."
The Priest, having thrust the holy spear obliquely into the right side of the prosphora, lifts out the holy bread and says: "For His life is taken away from the earth" and, having placed it face up on the holy diskos, after the call of the Deacon: "Sacrifice, Master," cuts it crosswise and says: "Sacrificed is the Lamb of God" and turns the other side of the bread, which has the cross, upwards. The Deacon says: "Pierce, Master." The Priest pierces the holy bread with the spear in the upper right corner, where the letters "IC" are imprinted, saying: "One of the soldiers."
109. The Deacon, having taken wine and water, says to the Priest: "Bless, Master, the holy union" and, when He has blessed, the Deacon himself or the Priest pours wine and a little water into the holy chalice, according to established prescriptions.
110. Then the Priest takes the second prosphora in his hands, however if there is no second or other prosphora, he finishes the prescribed liturgical actions on one, saying: "In honor and memory" and, having taken a particle, places it to the right of the holy bread, near its middle, saying: "At Thy right hand stood the Queen."
111. Then, having taken the third prosphora, He says: "Of the honorable, heavenly," takes the first particle, places it to the left of the holy bread, beginning the first row. Then He says: "Of the honorable, glorious Prophet, Forerunner." The taken particle He places under the first and says: "Of the holy, glorious," and then places the third particle under the second, finishing the first row. Then He says: "Of our holy Fathers"; having taken the fourth particle, He places it next to the first, beginning the second row. Then He says: "Of the holy Apostle, Protomartyr" and, having taken the fifth particle, places it under the first [of the second row], with which He begins the second row. After this He says: "Of our venerable and God-bearing [Fathers]" and, having taken the sixth particle, places it under the second [of the second row], finishing the second row. Then He says: "Of the holy and wonderworking Unmercenaries." Having taken the seventh particle, He places it next to the first [of the second row], beginning the third row. Then again He says: "Of the holy and righteous Ancestors of God" and places the eighth particle under the first [of the third row]. He takes the ninth particle, saying: "Of Saint (Name) and all saints," and places it at the end of the third row, finishing it.
112. After this He takes the fourth prosphora and says: "Remember, O Master, Lover of mankind, our most holy [Pontiff]," and places the taken particle below the holy bread. Then He mentions by name the living, Whom He wishes, and for each name takes out a particle, saying: "Remember, O Lord, (Name)."
113. Finally He takes the fifth prosphora, mentions the Bishop who ordained him, and by name the deceased, whom he wishes. For each name he takes out a particle, saying: "Remember, O Lord, the soul." Then He says: "And of all in the hope of resurrection" and takes out a particle. After this He says: "Remember, O Lord, according to the multitude of Thy compassions" and takes out a particle.
It should be noted that one may add other particles for the living and the deceased until the Great Entrance itself (see no. 192).
114. He gathers the particles on the diskos under the holy bread, so that they be together and so that none falls off[^768].
115. The Deacon takes the censer and, having put in incense, says to the Priest: "Bless, Master, the incense" and immediately says Himself: "Let us pray to the Lord," and the Priest blesses and recites the Prayer of the Censer "Incense we offer to Thee" (see no. 20).
Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord." The Priest, having censed the star-cover, places it over the holy bread, saying: "And the star came."
Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord." The Priest, having censed likewise the first veil, covers with it the holy bread with the diskos and says: "The Lord reigns."
Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord. Cover, Master." The Priest, having censed likewise the second veil, covers with it the holy chalice, saying: "Thy virtue."
Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord. Cover, Master." The Priest, having censed in the same manner the third veil, the so-called aer [vozdukh], covers with it the diskos and chalice, saying: "Cover us with the shelter."
Then the Priest, having taken the censer, censes the table of oblation, bowing together with the Deacon, and says: "Blessed is our God," and the Deacon responds: "Always, now and ever."
The Priest gives the censer to the Deacon either now, or after the Prayer of the Offering.
116. Then the Deacon says: "For the precious gifts offered," and the Priest, making no sign of blessing, recites the Prayer of the Offering: "O God, our God," after which He makes the dismissal there, speaking thus: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God." Deacon: "Glory, Both now," "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Bless."
On Sunday the Priest says the dismissal thus: "Christ, Who rose from the dead," and on other days: "Christ, our true God." Deacon: "Amen."
117. After the dismissal of the Proskomedia, the Priest goes before the holy table, and the Deacon censes the table of oblation three times, then the holy table from the four sides, saying quietly: "In the tomb" and the 50th(51st) Psalm, after which he censes the icon behind the altar. He goes out of the sanctuary through the northern doors, comes before the holy doors and, having bowed before them, censes the icons of the southern part of the iconostasis, beginning from the icon of the Savior, then - the icons of the northern part, beginning from the icon of the Theotokos, and then - the choirs, right and left. He censes the faithful either from the solea, or, if there is a custom, going through the church to the very narthex. Having returned through the southern doors into the sanctuary, he censes the holy table once more, only from the front, and likewise - the celebrant (see nos. 9, 20, 33, 39, 54; also no. 177).
118. Then He gives the censer to the server, and himself stands to the right of the Priest. Standing together before the holy table, they recite "O Heavenly King." Then they bow three times, saying: "Glory to God in the highest" (2), "O Lord, open my lips," then they kiss: the Priest - the Holy Gospel, and the Deacon - the holy table (see no. 102).
After this the Deacon bows his head before the Priest and, holding the orarion with three fingers of his right hand, says: "It is time." The Priest signs him and says: "Blessed is our God," and the Deacon: "Pray for me, Master." Priest: "May the Lord direct Thy steps." And again the Deacon: "Remember me, holy Master." Priest: "May the Lord God remember Thee." Deacon: "Amen."
The Deacon, having made a small bow and holding the orarion with three fingers of his right hand, goes out through the northern doors, for the holy doors remain closed until the Entrance itself and, having stood at his place before the holy doors, makes piously three small bows and prays quietly: "O Lord, open my lips."
After this, He raises the end of the orarion with His right hand and exclaims: "Bless, Master."
119. And the Priest, standing in the middle before the holy table and making the sign of the cross over it with the Holy Gospel[^769], begins loudly: "Blessed is the kingdom." Choir: "Amen."
The Deacon sings the Great Litany "In peace let us pray to the Lord," and the Priest recites quietly the Prayer of the First Antiphon "O Lord our God." Exclamation: "For to Thee belongs." Choir: "Amen."
The First Antiphon or the First Typika Psalm is sung, and the Deacon, having made a small bow, departs from his place and stands before the icon of Christ, holding the orarion with three fingers of His right hand.
120. After the completion of the Antiphon, the Deacon returns to his place and, having made a small bow, exclaims: "Again and again." And the Priest recites quietly the Prayer of the Second Antiphon: "O Lord our God, save Thy people." Exclamation: "For Thine is the dominion." Choir: "Amen."
Likewise the Second Antiphon or Typika [Psalm] is sung. The Deacon does the same as at the first prayer, only he stands now before the icon of the Theotokos.
After the Antiphon the Choir sings: "Glory, Both now," "Only-begotten Son," and the Priest says nothing and at "became man" does not bow.
121. Then the Deacon, having returned again to the usual place, sings: "Again and again," and the Priest recites quietly the Prayer of the Third Antiphon "Thou Who Hast given us." Exclamation: "For Thou Art a good." Choir: "Amen."
The Deacon returns into the sanctuary through the southern doors. Here the holy doors are opened.
122. The Third Antiphon or the Beatitudes, if it is Sunday, is sung. When the singers reach "Glory," the Priest and deacon, standing before the holy table, make three small bows. Then the Priest takes the Holy Gospel, gives it to the Deacon and lowers the phelonion. Both go around the holy table from the right side and, having gone out through the northern doors, preceded by candle-bearers, make the Little Entrance. Having come before the holy doors, the candle-bearers stand on opposite sides: one - near the icon of the Theotokos, and the other - of the Savior, the Priest - in the middle, and the Deacon - slightly in front of him, to the right. Both bow their heads and the Deacon says in a low voice: "Let us pray to the Lord," and the Priest recites quietly the Prayer of the Entrance "O Master, Lord our God."
After the completion of the prayer, the Deacon says in a low voice to the Priest, holding the orarion with three fingers and pointing to the east: "Bless, Master, the holy entrance." The Priest blesses to the east and says: "Blessed is the entrance." Then the Deacon presents to the Priest the Holy Gospel for kissing. When the last verse of the Antiphon or Beatitudes is finished, the Deacon goes out to the center, stands before the Priest, raises his hands slightly and, showing the Holy Gospel[^770], exclaims: "Wisdom, arise." Then they enter the sanctuary and the Deacon places the Holy Gospel on the throne, and the candle-bearers, having bowed together before the holy doors, return to their places. The Choir sings: "Come, let us worship," "Save us... who Art wonderful in the saints...", and if it is Sunday: "Save us... who rose from the dead...". After this - the usual troparia.
123. The Priest recites quietly the Prayer of the Trisagion "O Holy God." When the singers reach the last troparion, the Deacon bows his head before the Priest and, holding the orarion with three fingers in his hand, says: "Bless, Master, the time of the Thrice-Holy," and the Priest blesses him and exclaims: "For Holy Art Thou, our God."
The Deacon withdraws to the holy doors and, turned to the people, with the end of the orarion raised by three fingers of the right hand, exclaims: "and unto ages of ages." Choir: "Amen."
During the singing of the Trisagion, the Priest and deacon also recite it, making simultaneously three small bows before the holy table.
124. Then the Deacon says to the Priest: "Command, Master" and departs to the High Place. The Priest, going, says: "Blessed is he that comes." Deacon: "Bless, Master," and the Priest: "Blessed Art Thou on the throne" and blesses the High Place.
It is known that the Priest should not go up to the High Place, nor sit on it. It befits him to sit on the southern side of the High Throne.
125. After the completion of the Trisagion hymn, the Deacon approaches the holy doors and, holding the orarion with three fingers of the raised right hand, says: "Let us be attentive," and the Priest blesses the people and exclaims: "Peace be to all." Then again the Deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive" and returns to the Priest. The Choir sings the Prokimenon, the Psalm of David. After the Prokimenon, the Deacon: "Wisdom," and the Reader, dressed in a sticharion, in the middle of the sanctuary [temple], before the solea, reads the title of the Apostle: "The Acts...". And again the Deacon: "Let us be attentive."
After the completion of the reading of the Apostle, the Priest says: "Peace be to Thee." Deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." The Choir sings "Alleluia" with verses.
126. During the singing of "Alleluia," the Deacon, having taken the censer and put incense into it, approaches the Priest and says: "Bless, Master, the incense." Having received the blessing from the Priest, who says: "Blessed is our God," He censes around the holy table, the whole sanctuary, the Priest, the icons of the sanctuary, the icons of the iconostasis, both choirs and the people (see nos. 33 and 75).
And the Priest, standing before the holy table, recites quietly the Prayer before the Gospel "Illumine our hearts."
The Deacon, having given away the censer, approaches the Priest and, having bowed his head before him and holding the orarion with his fingers, points to the Holy Gospel and says loudly: "Bless, Master, the proclaimer of the holy Apostle." The Priest, blessing him, exclaims: "May God, through the prayers," and gives Him the Holy Gospel, and the Deacon answers: "Amen" and, having bowed to the Holy Gospel, takes it, goes out through the holy doors, preceded by candle-bearers who go out through the side doors, stands on the ambo or not far from the holy doors at the designated place, there places the Holy Gospel on the analogion and reads it, turned to the people.
The Priest stands before the throne and, looking to the west, exclaims: "Wisdom, arise, let us hear the Holy Gospel." Then he blesses: "Peace be to all." Choir: "And to Thy spirit." Priest: "The reading from the Holy Gospel according to (Name)." Deacon: "Let us be attentive." The Priest reads the Matins Gospel.
127. After the reading of the Gospel, the Priest says to the Deacon: "Peace be to Thee Who proclaimest." Choir: "Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee."
The Deacon comes to the very holy doors and gives the rolled Holy Gospel to the Priest[^771], who kisses it and places it in the middle of the throne before the tabernacle or places it on the right side of the holy table; the holy doors are closed again.
The Deacon stands at the usual place and begins thus: "Let us all say." The Priest recites quietly the Prayer "O Lord our God." Exclamation: "For a merciful." Choir: "Amen."
Then the Deacon: "Pray, ye catechumens." The Priest quietly recites the Prayer for the Catechumens "O Lord our God." Exclamation: "That with us they also." Choir: "Amen." The Priest unfolds the antimension [iliton].
The Deacon says loudly: "All catechumens, depart; catechumens, depart; all catechumens, depart. Let no catechumen remain. Only the faithful."
128. The Priest recites quietly the First Prayer of the Faithful "We thank Thee."
Deacon: "Help us, save us, have mercy." Choir: "Lord, have mercy."
Deacon: "Wisdom." Exclamation: "For to Thee belongs." Choir: "Amen."
Deacon: "Again and again." The Priest recites quietly the Second Prayer of the Faithful "Again and oftentimes."
Deacon: "Help us, save us, have mercy." Choir: "Lord, have mercy." Deacon: "Wisdom" and enters the sanctuary through the northern doors.
The Priest, not turning to the people, exclaims: "That being kept under Thy dominion." Choir: "Amen"; and the holy doors are opened[^782].
129. During the singing of the Cherubic Hymn, the Deacon, having taken the censer and put incense into it, approaches the Priest, saying: "Bless, Master, the incense" and, having received the blessing: "Blessed is God," recites the 50th(51st) Psalm and censes around the holy table, the icon behind the altar, the icons of the iconostasis, both choirs and the people. At the end, having returned through the southern doors into the sanctuary, He censes the Priest[^773]. The Priest, having lifted his hands up, recites quietly the prayer "No one is worthy."
After the censing, the Deacon stands to the right of the Priest, holding the censer on the ring finger of his left hand. The Priest together with the Deacon, having lifted their hands up, recite the Cherubic Hymn three times, each time making a small bow.
After this, where there exists a custom, the Priest and deacon kiss the holy table and, if they wish, the altar cross; then they go, the Deacon - in front, directly to the side altar. There the Priest, having taken the censer, censes the Holy Gifts crosswise, praying quietly: "O God, be merciful to me a sinner," gives the censer to the Deacon, who holds it on one of the fingers of his right hand.
The Deacon says to the Priest: "Take up, Master," and the Priest takes the large veil, which is called the aer, and places it on the Deacon's left shoulder, saying: "Lift up your hands."
Then he takes the holy diskos, covered with the small veil, and places it with attentiveness and piety on the Deacon's head[^774], and the Deacon, holding the end of the orarion with his left hand, holds the diskos with both hands on his head. The Priest himself takes the chalice, covered with the small veil, and holds it before him. Both go out through the northern doors, preceded by candle-bearers. These last arrive at the very holy doors and stand on both sides of them.
The Deacon, going out, calls: "All of you, Orthodox Christians" and enters through the holy doors into the sanctuary, where he waits for the Priest on the right side.
The Priest exclaims: "Our most holy [Pontiff]" and before the holy doors, when he exclaims "And all of you, Orthodox Christians," he turns to the people[^775]; then he enters the sanctuary.
130. The Priest, having entered through the holy doors, places the holy chalice on the throne; he also takes from the Deacon[^776] the holy diskos and places it on the throne, to the left of the chalice. Having removed the small veils from the diskos and chalice, he places them on the throne, and with the large veil, that is the aer, which he takes from the Deacon's shoulder and censes over the censer, he covers the Holy Gifts, saying: "The noble Joseph." Then, having taken the censer from the Deacon's hands, he censes the Holy Gifts crosswise, saying: "Do good, O Lord" (see nos. 9, 20, 149). During this prayer the holy doors are closed, and the candle-bearers, having made together a bow before the holy doors, withdraw to their places.
131. Having given away the censer, the Priest lowers the phelonion and, bowing his head, says to the Deacon: "Remember me, brother and concelebrant," and the Deacon responds to him: "May the Lord God remember Thy priesthood." Priest to this: "Pray for me, my concelebrant."
The Deacon, bowing his head, holding the orarion with three fingers of his right hand, says to the Priest: "The Holy Spirit shall come upon Thee." Priest: "And the power of the Most High." Then the Deacon to him: "Remember me, holy Master." Priest: "May the Lord God remember Thee." Deacon: "Amen."
132. The Deacon, having bowed to the Priest, goes out through the northern doors and, standing at the usual place, says: "Let us complete." The Priest reads quietly the Prayer of the Offering, after the placing of the divine gifts on the holy table "O Lord God Almighty." Exclamation: "Through the compassions." Choir: "Amen."
The Priest turns to the people and blesses: "Peace be to all." Choir: "And to Thy spirit."
Deacon: "Let us love one another," and the Priest bows three times, saying quietly: "I will love Thee, O Lord" and kisses the Holy Gifts as they are covered: first - the holy diskos, then - the holy chalice, and finally - the edge of the holy table before Himself. The Deacon, having made three small bows at his place and having kissed his orarion where the sign of the cross is on it, exclaims: "The doors, the doors" (see no. 200).
The Priest lifts the large veil, that is the aer, and, holding it over the Holy Gifts, recites together with the people the Symbol of Faith "I believe in one God" and does not bow at the words "and became man"[^777]; having kissed the aer, He places it on the usual (one) place on the throne.
133. Deacon: "Let us stand well." Choir: "A mercy of peace." The Deacon, having made a small bow, enters through the southern doors into the sanctuary, stands to the right of the Priest and, if necessary, takes the fan [rypida] and fans with it piously over the Holy Gifts. If there is no fan - he does this with the small (folded) veil.
The Priest at the words "The grace of our Lord" blesses the people. Choir: "And with Thy spirit."
The Priest, having turned to the east, lifts his hands up and calls: "Let us lift up our hearts." Choir: "We lift them up unto the Lord."
Then the Priest, folding his hands on his chest and bowing before the holy table, says: "Let us give thanks unto the Lord." Choir: "It is meet and right," and the Priest recites quietly the prayer "It is meet and right to hymn Thee." Exclamation: "Singing the triumphant hymn."
Then the Deacon approaches the Priest from the left side and, having taken the holy star-cover with his right hand, strikes the holy diskos with it above, below, on the left and on the right side, making thus the sign of the holy cross over it, and, having kissed the star-cover, places it on the holy table.
When the Choir sings "Holy, Holy, Holy," the Priest does not make the sign of the holy cross on himself with the star-cover.
134. After this the Deacon stands to the right of the Priest and, if necessary, takes into his hands the fan or small veil and silently, with all attention and reverence, fans over the Holy Gifts.
The Priest recites quietly the prayer "With these blessed powers, O Master, Lover of mankind."
At the words "took bread in His holy and most pure, and blameless hands, gave thanks and blessed," he does not take the holy diskos into his hands and does not lift it, but only blesses it once. Then, bowing his head and pointing with his hand to the holy diskos (the Deacon does the same with the orarion), he exclaims: "Take, eat." Choir: "Amen." The Priest together with the Deacon bow low, making the sign of the holy cross.
The Priest says quietly: "Likewise also the chalice" and again blesses once.
After this, bowing his head and pointing with his hand to the holy chalice (the Deacon does the same with the orarion), he exclaims: "Drink of it, all of you." Choir: "Amen." Again the Priest and deacon bow low, simultaneously making the sign of the holy cross on themselves.
135. The Priest recites quietly the prayer "Remembering this," and the Deacon, crossing his hands, taking with the right - the holy diskos, and with the left lifting slightly the holy chalice, makes the sign of the cross over the antimension [iliton]. The Priest exclaims: "Thine own of Thine own." Choir: "We praise Thee, we bless Thee."
And again the Priest and deacon make a small bow.
See the rest of the text above...
136. The Priest recites quietly the prayer "That to those who shall partake" and, taking the censer, exclaims: "Especially for our most holy," thrice censes the Gifts from the front of the table. Then he covers the holy chalice with the small veil or purificator. The Choir sings "It is truly meet" or, instead of "It is truly meet," the Heirmos of the feast that falls.
During this singing, the Deacon censes the holy table around and mentions whom he wishes of the deceased.
And the Priest quietly: "For the holy Prophet, Forerunner John" and mentions by name whom he wishes of the deceased: "And give them rest."
After "It is truly meet" the Priest exclaims: "Among the first, remember, O Lord." The Deacon mentions the living. Choir: "And all mankind."
The Priest prays quietly: "Remember, O Lord, this city in which we live" and mentions by name Whom He wishes of the living. Exclamation: "And grant us." Choir: "Amen."
The Priest turns to the west, however does not depart from the middle of the throne and blesses with the words "And may the mercies." Choir: "And with Thy spirit."
137. The Deacon, having received the blessing from the Priest, makes a small bow, goes around the holy table and goes out through the northern doors and, standing at his usual place, exclaims: "Having commemorated all the saints."
The Priest recites quietly the prayer "To Thee we entrust all our life." Exclamation: "And vouchsafe us, O Master." Choir: "Our Father." During the singing of the Lord's Prayer, the Priest raises his hands, and after it exclaims: "For Thine is the kingdom." Choir: "Amen."
The Priest turns to the west, however does not depart from the middle of the holy table and blesses with the words "Peace be to all." Choir: "And to Thy spirit." Deacon: "Bow your heads unto the Lord." Choir: "To Thee, O Lord."
The Priest prays quietly: "We give thanks unto Thee." Exclamation: "Through the grace and compassions." Choir: "Amen." And immediately the Priest reads quietly the prayer "Attend, O Lord," and the Deacon, standing before the holy doors, girds himself with the orarion crosswise, if he did not do this at the prayer "Our Father."
Then the Priest and also the Deacon, each at his place, make three small bows, saying quietly: "O God, be merciful to me a sinner," after which the Priest uncovers the chalice.
When the Deacon sees that the Priest has stretched out his hand to receive the Holy Bread, he exclaims: "Let us be attentive," and the Priest, lifting the Holy Bread slightly up, exclaims: "Holy things to the holy." Choir: "One is Holy, One is Lord"; the Communion Hymn is sung.
138. The Deacon makes a small bow and enters through the southern doors into the sanctuary and, having stood to the right of the Priest, makes once more a small bow and says: "Break, Master, the Holy Bread," and the Priest breaks it attentively and piously into four parts in this manner: first he divides it into two parts and the part which he holds in the right hand, that is the one that has the inscriptions "XC" and "KA", he places on the diskos, then breaks across between the letters "IC" and "NI" the part which he holds in the left hand and places the particle "IC" at the top of the diskos, and the particle "NI" - on the left; having taken then the second half, he breaks it in the middle between the letters "XC" and "KA" and places the particle "XC" at the bottom of the diskos, and the particle "KA" on the right edge of the diskos, so that the particles form the sign of the cross on the diskos. While doing this he says: "Broken and distributed."
And the Deacon, pointing with the orarion to the holy chalice, says: "Fill, Master, the holy Cup."
The Priest takes the upper particle, which has the sign "IC", makes with it the sign of the cross over the chalice and says: "The fullness of the Holy Spirit." And so He places it into the holy chalice. Deacon: "Amen."
Then the Priest wipes his fingers over the holy diskos.
139. If there is the rite of the zeon [warm water], the Deacon, presenting the warm water, says to the Priest: "Bless, Master, the warm water," and the Priest blesses it saying: "Blessed is the fervor of Thy saints." The Deacon pours a little water in the sign of the cross into the holy chalice, saying: "The fervor of faith" and, having set aside the vessel with the warm water, stands slightly at a distance[^778].
140. The Deacon goes around the holy table and, if necessary, washes the palm of his right hand and, at the words of the Priest "Deacon, approach," approaches him from the left side, bows to him, asking forgiveness.
The Priest breaks the particle of the Holy Bread "XC" and gives a part of it to the Deacon, and the Deacon kisses his hand, takes the Holy Bread on the palm of his right hand, having placed it crosswise over the left and says: "Give unto me, Master." And the Priest says: "To the sacred deacon (Name) is imparted."
The Deacon withdraws behind the throne, bowing his head, and prays like the Priest with the words "I believe, O Lord, and I confess." Likewise the Priest, having made a small bow, with two fingers of the right hand takes the second part of the particle "XC" and says: "The precious and most holy" and, bowing his head, prays with the words "I believe, O Lord, and I confess."
And then they consume the Holy Bread from their hands with fear and all caution: first - the Priest, and then - the Deacon.
141. Afterwards the Priest, bowing down, takes the chalice in his right hand, and in his left a small purificator, holding it under his chin, and communicates of the Blood from the chalice, saying: "Of the precious and holy Blood of the Lord and God." And wipes His lips, as well as the edge of the holy chalice, with the small purificator, saying: "Lo, this has touched my lips."
Then He calls the Deacon with the words: "Deacon, approach." The Deacon approaches and makes a small bow, saying: "Behold, I approach" and "Give unto me, Master."
The Priest takes the purificator and the chalice with his right hand, supporting the base of the chalice with his left. To the Deacon, who holds the end of the purificator under his chin with both hands, the Priest gives the holy chalice, saying: " The servant of God, deacon (Name), partakes." And after the communion of the Deacon the Priest says: "Lo, this has touched Thy lips."
The Deacon, having lifted the holy diskos over the holy chalice, carefully wipes it with a sponge, if there is a custom to use it, so that not a single crumb remains on the diskos. Then, if there are no faithful for communion, he covers the holy chalice with the purificator and the small veil, and on the holy diskos places the folded star-cover and folded veils. And the holy doors are opened.
142. The Deacon makes a small bow, takes with piety the chalice from the Priest and approaches the holy doors and, lifting the holy chalice, shows it to the people, saying: "With fear of God and with faith draw near." Choir: "Blessed is He that comes."
The Priest follows the Deacon, takes from him the holy chalice and from the holy doors blesses the people with it: "O God, save," and both return to the holy table.
If there be faithful for communion, the Deacon, having placed the spoon into the chalice, covers it with the purificator or its veil, or both and, having made a small bow, receives it with piety from the Priest, approaches the holy doors and, lifting the holy chalice, shows it to the people, saying: "With fear of God and with faith draw near." Choir: "Blessed is He that comes." The Priest follows the Deacon, takes from him the holy chalice and recites the prayer "I believe, O Lord." Simultaneously the Deacon takes the diskos from the throne. After the completion of the prayer, the Priest uncovers the holy chalice, holds the veil and purificator with his left hand and communicates with the spoon, saying "Of the precious, most holy." The Deacon holds the diskos under the chin of the communicant. After communion the Priest covers the chalice with the purificator or veil, or both, leaving the spoon in the chalice, blesses the people with it: "O God, save" and both return to the holy table.
One may also do thus: the Deacon covers the holy chalice with the purificator or its veil and, having made a small bow, receives piously the chalice from the Priest, approaches the holy doors and, lifting the chalice, shows it to the people, saying: "With fear of God and with faith draw near." Choir: "Blessed is He that comes." The Deacon returns to the holy table, where he places the chalice, from which he removes the small veil. The Priest takes the holy chalice with the spoon and purificator, and the Deacon - the diskos and they go out of the sanctuary; those who wish to communicate approach. After the prayer "I believe, O Lord," which the Priest leads, the faithful, with all piety and fear, having folded their arms crosswise on their chest, make a small bow and one by one approach for communion, or receive it in another manner, according to local custom. The Priest, communicating, says to each communicant: "The precious, most holy."
After the completion of the communion of the faithful, the Priest leaves the spoon in the chalice and covers it with the purificator. Then, having returned with the Deacon into the sanctuary, he places the Holy Gifts on the holy table, and the Deacon covers the holy chalice with its veil. The Priest takes once more the holy chalice and from the holy doors blesses the people with it, exclaiming: "O God, save Thy people." Choir: "We have seen the true light." And both return to the holy table.
143. The Priest places the holy chalice on the throne and censes it three times, praying quietly: "Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens." Then He gives the censer to the Deacon and, having taken the holy diskos, places it on the Deacon's head, and the Deacon, holding it with piety in front and looking towards the holy doors, saying nothing, goes straight between the holy table and the holy doors to the table of oblation and places the holy diskos on it. After this he waits for the Priest at the same place. And the Priest, having made a small bow and taken the holy chalice, turned to the holy doors, looks at the people and says quietly: "Blessed is our God," and then exclaims: "Always, now and ever." Choir: "Amen. Let our mouths be filled." The Priest goes to the table of oblation, after which the Deacon censes the Holy Gifts and the Priest. The Priest, having placed the Holy Gifts and made a small bow, returns to the holy table.
144. The Deacon, having untied the orarion, as custom prescribes, goes out through the northern doors and, standing at the usual place, exclaims: "Arise! Having partaken of the divine."
The Priest recites quietly the Prayer of Thanksgiving "We thank Thee, O Master" and, having made with the Holy Gospel the sign of the cross over the folded antimension [iliton][^779], places it on the antimension [iliton]. Exclamation: "For Thou Art our sanctification." Choir: "Amen."
The Priest, going towards the holy doors, exclaims: "Let us depart in peace." Choir: "In the name of the Lord." Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord." Choir: "Lord, have mercy."
The Priest enters through the holy doors into the temple of the faithful and, standing between the two choirs (see no. 184), reads loudly the Prayer behind the Ambo[^780] "O Lord, Who blessest those Who bless Thee." Choir: "Amen." And then: "Blessed be the name of the Lord" and, if there is a custom, Psalm 33(34) "I will bless the Lord."
At the Prayer behind the Ambo, the Deacon stands to the right and points with his orarion to the icon of the Savior. After the completion of the prayer, the Priest enters the holy doors and, immediately returning to the table of oblation, recites the Prayer at the Consuming of the Holy Gifts "Thou Who Art the fulfillment of the Law." The Deacon enters through the northern doors and consumes the Holy Gifts with fear and all caution.
The Priest, if there exists a custom, goes out through the holy doors and distributes the antidoron to the people, if not, the antidoron is distributed after the dismissal.
145. After the completion of the psalm and the distribution of the antidoron, the Priest stands in the holy doors and, blessing the people, exclaims: "The blessing of the Lord be upon you." Choir: "Amen."
The Priest, turned to the east, says: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God." Choir: "Glory, Both now," "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Bless."
The Priest turns again to the people, saying: "May Christ our true God." Choir: "Amen" (see no. 184).
At solemn and extraordinary liturgies, the Priest, turned to the people, exclaims the Polychronion, as custom prescribes.
After this the Priest enters the sanctuary and the holy doors are closed.
At the end, the Priest and deacon in the sanctuary or in the sacristy, take off the sacred vestments, saying: "Now lettest Thou" and wash their hands at the usual place. After the Small Dismissal they give thanks to God for everything and, having kissed the holy table, depart.
146. In seminaries, houses of study and other places where there are many priests, the Priest who serves as deacon performs his diaconal service fully, namely: he receives Holy Communion at that Liturgy at which he serves as deacon, from the hands of the Priest, and consumes what remains after communion.
2. In Concelebration of Two Deacons
147. On solemn feasts two deacons serve the Priest or concelebrants.
148. At the appropriate time the Priest enters the church and, together with both deacons, makes three small bows to the east before the holy doors. Then they do everything as at the Liturgy in concelebration with one deacon, and both respond to the Priest. After the prayer "O Lord, stretch forth Thy hand" the Priest, and with him the deacons, bow to the right and left choirs and depart into the sanctuary: the Priest and the 1st deacon - through the southern, and the 2nd deacon - through the northern doors, saying "I will enter into Thy house." Having arrived in the sanctuary, they make three small bows before the holy table and kiss: the Priest - the Holy Gospel, and the deacons - the holy table and all, if there exists a custom, - the altar cross, which is on the holy table. Having vested, they wash their hands and prepare everything for the Proskomedia. Only the 1st Deacon says: "Bless, Master" and everything else, and the Proskomedia is celebrated, according to custom.
149. After the dismissal of the Proskomedia, the deacons cense the offering with three swings, and then go together with the Priest before the holy table, saying quietly: "In the tomb with the body" and the rest, they cense together it from the front, then the 1st deacon - the right side of the holy table, and the 2nd deacon - the left, and again both together - from the east, then - the icon behind the altar and other icons of the sanctuary, as well as the 1st deacon - the cross, and the 2nd deacon - the icon of the Theotokos, if they be behind the throne (see no. 33). Then they go out of the sanctuary: the 1st deacon - through the southern, and the 2nd - through the northern doors. Having come before the holy doors, they cense the icons of the iconostasis: the 1st deacon begins from the icon of the Savior, and the 2nd - from the icon of the Theotokos, after this the 1st deacon - the right, and the 2nd - the left choirs. They cense the faithful, one from the right, and the other from the left side whether from the solea, or, if there exists a custom, - in the church itself, going to the very narthex, after which they enter the sanctuary: the 1st deacon - through the southern, and the 2nd - through the northern doors and cense once more the throne from the front with three swings and likewise the Priest.
150. Having given away the censers to the server, both approach the Priest and do everything as at the Liturgy in concelebration with one deacon. They go out: the 1st deacon - through the southern, and the 2nd - through the northern doors and, having stood at their places before the holy doors, make three small bows, saying quietly thrice: "O Lord, open my lips." After this the 1st deacon begins: "Bless, Master."
151. The first deacon sings the Great Litany. During the singing by the Choir of the first Antiphon or Typika [Psalm], he makes a small bow, departs from his place and stands before the icon of Christ, holding the orarion with three fingers of His right hand, according to custom (see no. 120).
After the completion of the Antiphon, the 2nd deacon, having approached and stood at the usual place, sings: "Again and again." When the Choir sings the second Antiphon or Typika [Psalm], he does the same as the 1st deacon during the first Antiphon, and stands before the icon of the Theotokos.
After the second Antiphon the Choir sings: "Glory, Both now," "Only-begotten Son." The Priest recites nothing quietly. Neither the Priest nor the deacons bow their heads at "became man."
Then the 1st deacon returns to his place and begins "Again and again." After the completion of the litany, both depart into the sanctuary: the 1st - through the southern, and the 2nd - through the northern doors and stand to the right and left of the Priest.
152. When the singers, who are singing the third Antiphon or the Beatitudes, reach "Glory" or the last verses of the Beatitudes, the Priest and deacons make three small bows. Then the Priest hands the Holy Gospel to the 1st deacon, and himself lowers the phelonion (see no. 34). The Priest with the 1st deacon go around the holy table from the right side, during which the 2nd Deacon takes the censer, and all go out through the northern doors, preceded by candle-bearers: first goes, censing, the 2nd deacon, then - the 1st deacon, carrying the Holy Gospel, and behind them - the Priest. Having approached the holy doors, the candle-bearers stand on opposite sides: one - near the icon of the Theotokos, and the other - near the icon of the Savior, the 1st deacon - on the right, and the 2nd - on the left side, and the Priest stands in the middle behind them.
The first Deacon says: "Let us pray to the Lord," and the Priest recites quietly the Prayer of the Entrance. After the completion of the prayer the 1st deacon, pointing with his right hand to the east, says to the Priest: "Bless, Master, the holy entrance." The Priest blesses and the 1st deacon gives the Priest the Holy Gospel for kissing. After the completion of the last verse of the Antiphon or Beatitudes, the 2nd deacon goes out to the center, and the 1st deacon, having stood behind him, exclaims: "Wisdom, arise." After this all enter the sanctuary, the 2nd deacon gives away the censer, and the 1st deacon places the Holy Gospel on the holy table[^781].
153. When the singers reach the last troparion, the 1st Deacon says: "Bless, Master, the time of the Thrice-Holy," and the Priest: "For Holy Art Thou." The 1st Deacon exclaims: "and unto ages of ages."
During the singing of the Trisagion, both the Priest and the deacons recite it. Then the Priest goes with the deacons to the High Throne and says: "Blessed is he that comes," and the 1st deacon: "Bless, Master."
154. After the completion of the Trisagion hymn, the deacons approach the holy doors and the 1st Deacon says: "Let us be attentive." Priest: "Peace be to all," and the 2nd deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive!". After the Prokimenon the 1st deacon: "Wisdom" and, after the reading by the Reader of the title of the Apostle, the 2nd deacon: "Let us be attentive." At the end of the reading of the Apostle, the deacons with the Priest return before the holy table.
After the completion of the Apostle, the Priest says: "Peace be to Thee," and the 1st deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive."
155. During the singing of "Alleluia," the deacons, having taken censers and put in incense, approach the Priest and say: "Bless, Master, the incense" and, having received the blessing, cense the holy table first from the front, then the 1st deacon - from the right side, and the 2nd - from the left and again both together - from the east, then - the icon behind the altar and other icons of the sanctuary, the 2nd deacon also - the oblation, and both - everything else, according to custom.
Then the deacons, having placed the censers in their places, approach the Priest and the 1st Deacon exclaims: "Bless, Master, the proclaimer of the holy Apostle." Priest: "May God, through the prayers" and gives Him the Gospel. The 2nd deacon: "Wisdom, arise, let us hear the Holy Gospel." Priest: "Peace be to all." The 1st deacon, having stood on the ambo or somewhat before the holy doors on the designated place: "The reading from the Holy Gospel according to (Name)." The 2nd deacon: "Let us be attentive" and everything else, according to custom.
156. Then the deacons go out through their doors and stand at the designated places, and the 1st deacon begins: "Let us all say." Then the 2nd deacon: "Pray, ye catechumens." 1st deacon: "All catechumens." 2nd deacon: "Catechumens, depart" and again the 1st deacon: "All catechumens, depart. Let no catechumen remain, only the faithful. Choir: "Lord, have mercy." 1st deacon: "Help us, save us, have mercy," "Wisdom." 2nd deacon: "Again and again," "Help us, save us, have mercy," "Wisdom." After this both enter the sanctuary. And the holy doors are opened[^782].
157. During the singing of the Cherubic Hymn, the deacons, having taken censers, put in incense and received the blessing, recite the 50th(51st) Psalm and cense the throne, the sanctuary and everything else, as was noted above concerning this (see no. 149).
After the censing, the deacons stand on the sides of the Priest, holding the censers on the ring finger of the left hand and together with the Priest, lifting their hands up, recite all together three times the Cherubic Hymn, after each time making a small bow (see no. 129).
Then, if there exists a custom, the Priest kisses the holy table and the altar cross, and the deacons - the edge of the holy table and, directly, in front - the deacons, they go to the table of oblation. There the Priest, having taken the censer from the 1st deacon, censes the Holy Gifts.
The first Deacon says to the Priest: "Take up, Master." And the Priest takes off the large veil and gives it to the 2nd deacon, who holds the censer on the ring finger of his right hand, and says: "Lift up your hands."
Then the Priest takes the holy diskos and places it on the head of the 1st deacon (see no. 129), and he holds the diskos with both hands in front, holding simultaneously with his left hand the end of the orarion. The Priest himself takes the chalice. Then all, accompanied by candle-bearers, go out through the northern doors: the 2nd deacon, who goes out first, exclaims: "All of you, Orthodox Christians." After him the same is exclaimed by the 1st deacon, and the Priest says: "Our most holy [Pontiff]."
The deacons, having entered through the holy doors into the sanctuary, stand not far from them on opposite sides: the 2nd - on the left, and the 1st - on the right. After the words "All of you" the Priest enters the sanctuary and, having approached the front with the deacons, places the holy chalice on the throne, also takes from the 1st deacon the holy diskos and places it on the throne to the left of the chalice; with the large veil, which he takes from the 2nd deacon and censes over the censer, he covers the Holy Gifts, then takes from the hands of the 2nd deacon the censer and censes with it the Holy Gifts (see no. 130).
During this the holy doors are closed and the dialogue between the Priest and both deacons takes place. Having given a bow to the Priest, the deacons go out through their doors and stand at the usual place, and the 1st - sings "Let us complete."
158. The second deacon: "Let us love one another." The deacons, and simultaneously also the Priest, make three small bows at their places and both deacons kiss each other on the left shoulder.
The first Deacon exclaims: "The doors, the doors." At "and became man" neither the deacons nor the Priest bow their heads.
First deacon: "Let us stand well."
The deacons, having made a small bow, enter through their doors into the sanctuary and stand on the sides of the Priest. The 1st deacon, if necessary, takes the fan or the small folded veil and fans over the Holy Gifts.
At "Singing the triumphant hymn," the 2nd Deacon takes with his right hand the star-cover and strikes with it on the holy diskos, as was said above about this and, having kissed it, lays it aside on the throne (see no. 133).
159. During the exclamation of the words of consecration, the deacons together with the Priest point with the orarion to the holy diskos, and then - to the holy chalice.
After the consecration of both the Holy Bread and the Holy Cup, the deacons bow low, making simultaneously the sign of the cross on themselves.
After the words of the Priest "Thine own of Thine own," which He says quietly, the 1st Deacon takes in his right hand the holy diskos, and the 2nd deacon, also with the right hand, - the holy chalice, so that the right hand of the 1st deacon rests on the right hand of the 2nd deacon. After this the deacons slightly lift the Holy [Gifts], tracing the sign of the cross over the antimension [iliton], and the Priest exclaims: "Thine own of Thine own."
Having placed the diskos and chalice, the Priest and deacons make again a small bow. After this the Priest recites quietly the prayer "Again we offer," during which the 1st deacon fans over the Holy Gifts, if necessary.
After the completion of the prayer, the 1st deacon lays aside the fan or veil and both deacons approach the Priest, who together with them makes three small bows. Then the 1st deacon, pointing with the orarion to the Holy Bread: "Bless, Master, the Holy Bread." And the Priest, bowing, blesses the Holy Bread with the words: "And make this Bread." Deacon: "Amen."
And again the Deacon, pointing with the orarion to the holy chalice: "Bless, Master, the holy Cup." The Priest blesses it with the words: "And that which is in this Cup." Deacon: "Amen."
And once more the Deacon, pointing with the orarion simultaneously to the diskos and the chalice, says: "Bless, Master, both." The Priest blesses both, saying: "Changing them by Thy Holy Spirit." Deacon: "Amen, Amen, Amen."
Bowing his head before the Priest, the Deacon returns to the previous place and, taking the fan, fans with it over the Holy Gifts.
160. During the singing of "It is truly meet," the deacons cense the throne from the sides, each - from his own, and from the east and commemorate the deceased, whom they wish.
And after "Among the first, remember, O Lord," the deacons commemorate the living.
After the exclamation "And grant that with one mouth," the deacons, having made a small bow, go out, with the permission of the Priest, through their doors and stand at the usual place. The second Deacon says: "Having commemorated all the saints."
At the words of the Priest "Peace be to all" and the response of the Choir "And to Thy spirit," the 2nd Deacon exclaims: "Bow your heads unto the Lord."
During the quiet prayer of the Priest "We give thanks," the deacons stand before the holy doors and gird themselves with the oraria crosswise, if they did not do this earlier - at "Our Father."
Then the Priest and also the Deacon, each at his place, make three small bows, saying quietly: "O God, be merciful to me a sinner," after which the Priest uncovers the chalice.
When the Deacon sees that the Priest has stretched out his hand to receive the Holy Bread, he exclaims: "Let us be attentive," and the Priest, lifting the Holy Bread slightly up, exclaims: "Holy things to the holy." Choir: "One is Holy, One is Lord"; the Communion Hymn is sung.
161. The Deacon makes a small bow and enters through the southern doors into the sanctuary and, having stood to the right of the Priest, makes once more a small bow and says: "Break, Master, the Holy Bread," and the Priest breaks it attentively and piously into four parts in this manner: first he divides it into two parts and the part which he holds in the right hand, that is the one that has the inscriptions "XC" and "KA", he places on the diskos, then breaks across between the letters "IC" and "NI" the part which he holds in the left hand and places the particle "IC" at the top of the diskos, and the particle "NI" - on the left; having taken then the second half, he breaks it in the middle between the letters "XC" and "KA" and places the particle "XC" at the bottom of the diskos, and the particle "KA" on the right edge of the diskos, so that the particles form the sign of the cross on the diskos. While doing this he says: "Broken and distributed."
And the Deacon, pointing with the orarion to the holy chalice, says: "Fill, Master, the holy Cup."
The Priest takes the upper particle, which has the sign "IC", makes with it the sign of the cross over the chalice and says: "The fullness of the Holy Spirit." And so He places it into the holy chalice. Deacon: "Amen."
Then the Priest wipes his fingers over the holy diskos.
162. If there is the rite of the zeon [warm water], the Deacon, presenting the warm water, says to the Priest: "Bless, Master, the warm water," and the Priest blesses it saying: "Blessed is the fervor of Thy saints." The Deacon pours a little water in the sign of the cross into the holy chalice, saying: "The fervor of faith" and, having set aside the vessel with the warm water, stands slightly at a distance[^778].
163. The Deacon goes around the holy table and, if necessary, washes the palm of his right hand and, at the words of the Priest "Deacon, approach," approaches him from the left side, bows to him, asking forgiveness.
The Priest breaks the particle of the Holy Bread "XC" and gives a part of it to the Deacon, and the Deacon kisses his hand, takes the Holy Bread on the palm of his right hand, having placed it crosswise over the left and says: "Give unto me, Master." And the Priest says: "To the sacred deacon (Name) is imparted."
The Deacon withdraws behind the throne, bowing his head, and prays like the Priest with the words "I believe, O Lord, and I confess." Likewise the Priest, having made a small bow, with two fingers of the right hand takes the second part of the particle "XC" and says: "The precious and most holy" and, bowing his head, prays with the words "I believe, O Lord, and I confess."
And then they consume the Holy Bread from their hands with fear and all caution: first - the Priest, and then - the Deacon.
164. Afterwards the Priest, bowing down, takes the chalice in his right hand, and in his left a small purificator, holding it under his chin, and communicates of the Blood from the chalice, saying: "Of the precious and holy Blood of the Lord and God." And wipes His lips, as well as the edge of the holy chalice, with the small purificator, saying: "Lo, this has touched my lips."
Then He calls the Deacon with the words: "Deacon, approach." The Deacon approaches and makes a small bow, saying: "Behold, I approach" and "Give unto me, Master."
The Priest takes the purificator and the chalice with his right hand, supporting the base of the chalice with his left. To the Deacon, who holds the end of the purificator under his chin with both hands, the Priest gives the holy chalice, saying: " The servant of God, deacon (Name), partakes." And after the communion of the Deacon the Priest says: "Lo, this has touched Thy lips."
The Deacon, having lifted the holy diskos over the holy chalice, carefully wipes it with a sponge, if there is a custom to use it, so that not a single crumb remains on the diskos. Then, if there are no faithful for communion, he covers the holy chalice with the purificator and the small veil, and on the holy diskos places the folded star-cover and folded veils. And the holy doors are opened.
165. The Deacon makes a small bow, takes with piety the chalice from the Priest and approaches the holy doors and, lifting the holy chalice, shows it to the people, saying: "With fear of God and with faith draw near." Choir: "Blessed is He that comes."
The Priest follows the Deacon, takes from him the holy chalice and from the holy doors blesses the people with it: "O God, save," and both return to the holy table.
If there be faithful for communion, the Deacon, having placed the spoon into the chalice, covers it with the purificator or its veil, or both and, having made a small bow, receives it with piety from the Priest, approaches the holy doors and, lifting the holy chalice, shows it to the people, saying: "With fear of God and with faith draw near." Choir: "Blessed is He that comes." The Priest follows the Deacon, takes from him the holy chalice and recites the prayer "I believe, O Lord." Simultaneously the Deacon takes the diskos from the throne. After the completion of the prayer, the Priest uncovers the holy chalice, holds the veil and purificator with his left hand and communicates with the spoon, saying "Of the precious, most holy." The Deacon holds the diskos under the chin of the communicant. After communion the Priest covers the chalice with the purificator or veil, or both, leaving the spoon in the chalice, blesses the people with it: "O God, save" and both return to the holy table.
One may also do thus: the Deacon covers the holy chalice with the purificator or its veil and, having made a small bow, receives piously the chalice from the Priest, approaches the holy doors and, lifting the chalice, shows it to the people, saying: "With fear of God and with faith draw near." Choir: "Blessed is He that comes." The Deacon returns to the holy table, where he places the chalice, from which he removes the small veil. The Priest takes the holy chalice with the spoon and purificator, and the Deacon - the diskos and they go out of the sanctuary; those who wish to communicate approach. After the prayer "I believe, O Lord," which the Priest leads, the faithful, with all piety and fear, having folded their arms crosswise on their chest, make a small bow and one by one approach for communion, or receive it in another manner, according to local custom. The Priest, communicating, says to each communicant: "The precious, most holy."
After the completion of the communion of the faithful, the Priest leaves the spoon in the chalice and covers it with the purificator. Then, having returned with the Deacon into the sanctuary, he places the Holy Gifts on the holy table, and the Deacon covers the holy chalice with its veil. The Priest takes once more the holy chalice and from the holy doors blesses the people with it, exclaiming: "O God, save Thy people." Choir: "We have seen the true light." And both return to the holy table.
166. The Priest places the holy chalice on the throne and censes it three times, praying quietly: "Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens." Then He gives the censer to the Deacon and, having taken the holy diskos, places it on the Deacon's head, and the Deacon, holding it with piety in front and looking towards the holy doors, saying nothing, goes straight between the holy table and the holy doors to the table of oblation and places the holy diskos on it. After this he waits for the Priest at the same place. And the Priest, having made a small bow and taken the holy chalice, turned to the holy doors, looks at the people and says quietly: "Blessed is our God," and then exclaims: "Always, now and ever." Choir: "Amen. Let our mouths be filled." The Priest goes to the table of oblation, after which the Deacon censes the Holy Gifts and the Priest. The Priest, having placed the Holy Gifts and made a small bow, returns to the holy table.
167. The Deacon, having untied the orarion, as custom prescribes, goes out through the northern doors and, standing at the usual place, exclaims: "Arise! Having partaken of the divine."
The Priest recites quietly the Prayer of Thanksgiving "We thank Thee, O Master" and, having made with the Holy Gospel the sign of the cross over the folded antimension [iliton][^779], places it on the antimension [iliton]. Exclamation: "For Thou Art our sanctification." Choir: "Amen."
The Priest, going towards the holy doors, exclaims: "Let us depart in peace." Choir: "In the name of the Lord." Deacon: "Let us pray to the Lord." Choir: "Lord, have mercy."
The Priest enters through the holy doors into the temple of the faithful and, standing between the two choirs (see no. 184), reads loudly the Prayer behind the Ambo[^780] "O Lord, Who blessest those Who bless Thee." Choir: "Amen." And then: "Blessed be the name of the Lord" and, if there is a custom, Psalm 33(34) "I will bless the Lord."
At the Prayer behind the Ambo, the Deacon stands to the right and points with his orarion to the icon of the Savior. After the completion of the prayer, the Priest enters the holy doors and, immediately returning to the table of oblation, recites the Prayer at the Consuming of the Holy Gifts "Thou Who Art the fulfillment of the Law." The Deacon enters through the northern doors and consumes the Holy Gifts with fear and all caution.
The Priest, if there exists a custom, goes out through the holy doors and distributes the antidoron to the people, if not, the antidoron is distributed after the dismissal.
168. After the completion of the psalm and the distribution of the antidoron, the Priest stands in the holy doors and, blessing the people, exclaims: "The blessing of the Lord be upon you." Choir: "Amen."
The Priest, turned to the east, says: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God." Choir: "Glory, Both now," "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Bless."
The Priest turns again to the people, saying: "May Christ our true God." Choir: "Amen" (see no. 184).
At solemn and extraordinary liturgies, the Priest, turned to the people, exclaims the Polychronion, as custom prescribes.
After this the Priest enters the sanctuary and the holy doors are closed.
At the end, the Priest and deacon in the sanctuary or in the sacristy, take off the sacred vestments, saying: "Now lettest Thou" and wash their hands at the usual place. After the Small Dismissal they give thanks to God for everything and, having kissed the holy table, depart.
169. In seminaries, houses of study and other places where there are many priests, the Priest who serves as deacon performs his diaconal service fully, namely: he receives Holy Communion at that Liturgy at which he serves as deacon, from the hands of the Priest, and consumes what remains after communion.
3. Without a Deacon
170. A Priest who serves without a Deacon performs and recites all that which belongs to the Deacon, considering the following:
171. He does not say "Bless, Master," "Let us pray to the Lord," "Take up, Master," etc., with the exception of what is said before the Prayer behind the Ambo, that is "Let us pray to the Lord."
172. After the dismissal of the Proskomedia, the Priest censes as the Deacon: from the solea - the iconostasis, both choirs and the people (see nos. 33 and 75).
173. The prayers of the Great and Small Litanies the Priest recites before the exclamation, and not after it.
174. For the Little Entrance, the Priest takes the Holy Gospel, goes around the throne from the right side and goes out through the northern doors. Bowing his head before the holy doors, he recites the Prayer of the Entrance "O Master, Lord our God," blesses the entrance with His right hand, kisses the Gospel and, showing it, exclaims: "Wisdom, arise." After this He enters the sanctuary through the holy doors (see no. 122, note).
He finishes the Prayer of the Trisagion with the exclamation "For Holy Art Thou," not turning to the people. After the Trisagion, He goes behind the throne, reciting the words of blessing, and sits on the southern side.
175. When the Choir finishes singing the Thrice-Holy Hymn, the Priest exclaims: "Let us be attentive" and blesses: "Peace be to all. Wisdom, let us be attentive." The Choir sings the Prokimenon. Priest: "Wisdom." The Reader announces the title of the Apostle. Priest: "Let us be attentive." After the reading of the Apostle he says to the Reader: "Peace be to Thee" and immediately after this: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." Choir: "Alleluia" with verses.
Then the Priest blesses the incense, takes the censer, censes the throne around, the whole sanctuary and from the solea - the iconostasis, both choirs and the people. Already during this or even later he recites quietly the Prayer before the Gospel "Illumine our hearts." After the completion of "Alleluia" with verses, he exclaims: "Wisdom, arise, let us hear the Holy Gospel" and, blessing the people, says: "Peace be to all." Choir: "And to Thy spirit." Priest: "The reading from the Holy Gospel according to (Name)." He takes after this the Book of the Gospels, places it on the analogion somewhat outside the holy doors and reads the Gospel, turned to the people. After the reading, he kisses the rolled book and places it on the middle of the throne or on its right side (see no. 126, note).
176. Having recited the Prayer of the Cherubic Hymn, the Priest blesses the incense, after which he then censes around the holy table, the icon behind the altar, the oblation and from the solea - the iconostasis, both choirs and the people. Having returned to the throne and holding the censer on the ring finger of his left hand, he recites, having lifted his hands, three times the Cherubic Hymn. Then he approaches the oblation, with three swings censes the Holy Gifts, saying quietly: "O God, be merciful to me a sinner." Then He takes the large veil and places it on His own left shoulder, saying: "Lift up your hands," takes the holy diskos - with the left, and the chalice - with the right hand and goes out through the northern doors, exclaiming: "May the Lord God remember" (see no. 129). Having entered through the holy doors, He places the Holy Gifts on the throne, as is proper, censes the large veil over the censer, which the server presents, saying: "The noble Joseph." Then, having taken the censer from the hands of the server, he censes the Holy Gifts with three swings, saying: "Do good, O Lord."
177. Having given away the censer, he exclaims the litany "Let us complete," "Help us, save us, have mercy." Reciting the Symbol of Faith he lifts the aer and holds it over the Holy Gifts. According to the prescription, exclaiming "Singing the triumphant hymn," he strikes the diskos with the star-cover as the Deacon does, kisses it and lays it aside on the holy table (see no. 133).
After the prayer "Remembering this," He crosses His hands: taking with the right hand the holy diskos, and with the left - the holy chalice, and, lifting slightly, makes the sign of the cross over the antimension [iliton] and exclaims "Thine own of Thine own." After the exclamation "Especially for our most holy" He censes the holy table only from the front, and not around. Before the elevation of the Lamb He says: "Let us be attentive" and Himself pours warm water into the chalice, according to the prescription.
178. The Priest, having gathered all particles that were on the diskos into the chalice, covers it with the purificator or veil, or even both, places the folded star-cover, small veil and aer on the diskos. Having drawn open the curtain of the iconostasis and opened the holy doors, he places the spoon on the chalice or puts it into the chalice and, having made a small bow, takes the holy chalice in his hands; approaches the holy doors and, showing the chalice, exclaims: "With fear." Immediately after this he recites: "I believe, O Lord, and I confess." After the completion of the prayers, He covers the chalice and administers communion with the spoon. Having finished the communion of the faithful, he leaves the spoon in the chalice, covers it with the purificator and veil and, blessing the people, exclaims: "O God, save Thy people." Having returned to the holy table, He places the chalice and censes it with three swings, saying: "Be Thou exalted." Having made a small bow, He takes with the right hand the holy chalice, and with the left - the holy diskos, having said first quietly: "Blessed is our God," and then loudly: "Always, now and ever" and, turning to the people, goes to the table of oblation, on which He places everything. Having made after this a small bow, He returns to the holy table (see no. 142).
179. One may also do thus: having communicated, the Priest places the holy diskos on the holy chalice and covers it with the small veil or purificator, or even both. Having made a small bow, he takes the holy chalice and, showing it to the people, exclaims: "With fear." Having returned to the holy table, he takes the chalice and diskos between the index and middle fingers, takes the spoon with the right hand and begins to communicate the faithful. After the completion of communion, he leaves the spoon in the chalice, returns to the holy table and places the diskos and chalice on it, covers it with the small veil. After this he takes the chalice and, turning to the people, blesses them with the chalice, saying: "O God, save Thy people." Having placed the chalice on the holy table, He censes it with three swings, saying: "Be Thou exalted." Then He places the purificator under the small veil, with which the chalice is covered, and places the folded star-cover and the second small veil and aer on the holy diskos, makes a small bow, takes the holy chalice and, having turned to the holy doors, looking at the people, says quietly: "Blessed is our God"; after this exclaims: "Always, now and ever." Then He takes from the throne with His left hand the diskos and goes to the table of oblation, on which He leaves everything, and after a small bow returns to the holy table.
180. The Priest, exclaiming the thanksgiving litany "Arise! Having partaken," the prayer and the exclamation "For Thou Art our sanctification," folds the antimension [iliton] according to the prescription. After the dismissal He returns to the sanctuary and closes the holy doors. At the end He goes to the table of oblation and consumes there the Holy Gifts with fear and all caution, washes His hands and, having thanked God, departs.
4. Rubric of the Non-Solemn Divine Liturgy, that is, served ordinarily
181. All rites and ceremonies which we perform at the solemn Liturgy must be preserved also in the ordinary Liturgy, whether, as it is said, in the private Liturgy. What, according to the prescription, is to be exclaimed, let it be exclaimed so that it can be heard not only by the Reader or singer, that is, the one who serves, but also by those present.
182. The Reader, if possible, should wear a sticharion. His usual place is outside the sanctuary. He stands directly on the right or on the left side of the iconostasis. If it is necessary to enter the sanctuary, for example, to give the Priest the censer or warm water, he may enter only through the side doors. The Priest closes and opens the holy doors, and draws the curtain shut and open himself.
183. The use of the censer in Liturgies which we celebrate without any solemnity is not absolutely prescribed, but it will be very praiseworthy to use it.
184. If there is a lack of time for reciting all the preparatory prayers before the iconostasis, let the Priest never omit the prayer "O Lord, stretch forth Thy hand." Having entered the sanctuary, let Him read the psalm "I will enter into Thy house" and, having kissed the holy table, the Gospel and, if there exists a custom, - the altar cross, puts on the sacred vestments.
185. The Proskomedia should be celebrated not in the sacristy, but on the side altar [table of oblation] which is located near the holy table. The custom of using five prosphora is not necessary, on the contrary, it is permitted to use only one prosphora at several liturgies, even if the sign of the Lamb on the prescribed side is not imprinted, however, at every Liturgy the Priest is obliged to cut the bread and take out particles as if the bread were whole, not using dried lambs and not using either the Lamb or particles cut earlier by the one who serves.
186. The Little Entrance with the Gospel is done according to the prescriptions, going around the holy table and going out of the sanctuary through the northern doors.
187. After the Prayer of the Trisagion, the Priest may omit the blessing of the High Throne. Turned to the west, he listens to the reading of the Apostle, having lowered the phelonion and hands under it. He may read the Gospel also without an analogion, when the server, if there exists a custom, supports the book with his head before the holy doors.
188. The Great Entrance is done according to the prescriptions, going out through the northern doors.
189. The Priest does not fan over the Holy Gifts, unless there arises a danger that something might fall into the chalice. He does not pour warm water, if he cannot do this conveniently.
190. He recites the Prayer behind the Ambo before the holy doors, and when he blesses and makes the dismissal, he stands in the very holy doors.
191. After the dismissal he does not recite any other prayer, but immediately closes the holy doors.
5. With Concelebrants
192. Actual concelebrants are priests who, with the principal celebrant, exclaim the words of consecration, and non-actual, or ordinary assistants - those who do not exclaim the words of consecration. Nothing prevents, if at a solemn concelebration, however not at an ordinary Liturgy, assisting priests join the actual concelebrants.
193. Actual concelebrants, whether at a solemn Liturgy or at a private Liturgy, celebrate for the first accepted intention.
194. Priests who actually concelebrate are obliged to recite all the priestly prayers as well as their endings, that is the exclamations, up to the very Prayer of Thanksgiving "We thank Thee" after communion inclusive. And the litanies each either exclaims Himself, according to the prescribed order, or only listens, recites the prayers when the Deacon or another Priest exclaims the litany. Priests who only assist are not obliged to read the priestly prayers, for the principal celebrant is to recite them, but only to say the exclamations in turn.
195. The rites and blessings are performed only by the principal celebrant himself. Bows are made by all together, they lift their hands where it is prescribed and can be done conveniently.
a) In the solemn form
196. It will be good if all together recite the introductory prayers before the iconostasis, but let only the principal priest kiss the icons.
197. All concelebrants, while putting on the prescribed priestly vestments, recite the appropriate prayers. Then each, holding in his hands a small Liturgicon, stands at the side of the holy table or also behind it, however not before it, where only the principal celebrant with the deacons occupies the place, and so all arrange themselves, each according to the rank of his dignity or his ordination. The first among the concelebrants or those standing by stands on the right side of the principal celebrant, the second - on the left, the third - again on the right and so on.
198. The Proskomedia is celebrated by one of the concelebrants and only he recites the Prayer of the Offering. However, all concelebrants may, according to their own intentions, place their particles (see no. 113).
199. These exclamations belong to the principal celebrant:
- "For to Thee belongs," after the Great Litany;
- "For Holy Art Thou," after the Prayer of the Trisagion;
- "For a merciful," after the litany "Let us all say";
- "That being kept under Thy dominion always," after the Second Prayer of the Faithful;
- "Through the compassions," after the Prayer of the Offering;
- "Singing the triumphant hymn," before "Holy";
- "Especially for our most holy," mentioning the Most Holy Theotokos;
- "And grant that with one mouth," at the end of the Anaphora;
- "And may the mercies," after the Anaphora;
- "And vouchsafe us, O Master," before "Our Father";
- "For Thou Art our sanctification," after communion.
Other exclamations are taken by the concelebrants in turn. To better maintain order, the principal celebrant invites the concelebrants to exclaim with a nod of the head, and then the one who is to exclaim gives consent, bowing his head in the direction of the principal celebrant.
200. For the Little Entrance all go out, having lowered their hands under the lowered phelonion, through the northern doors, in front - the younger ones, and stand before the holy doors in two rows, one near another, the principal celebrant stands with everyone in the middle. The principal celebrant himself recites the Prayer of the Entrance. After the call of the Deacon: "Wisdom, arise" all enter behind the Deacon through the holy doors into the sanctuary and occupy their places near the holy table.
201. The concelebrants sit near the High Throne in the same order in which they stand at the throne, that is, those who stand to the right of the principal celebrant sit to his right, and those on the left side - sit to the left.
202. During the reading of the Gospel all remain in their places, looking towards the ambo or the place from which the Gospel is read.
203. At the Cherubic Hymn all lift their hands, if this can be done conveniently, but all recite the Cherubic Hymn and make the prescribed bows. During the censing of the holy table by the Deacon all step away from it slightly so that the Deacon can easily go around it.
204. From the table of oblation each takes one of the things used in the Divine Sacrifice, namely: the spear, the spoon, holding them on their chests. All go out through the northern doors, in front - the Deacon, who exclaims: "All of you" and stands in the holy doors in the sanctuary, behind him other concelebrating priests, beginning from the youngest, exclaiming each: "All of you," one or even several, if there is a custom, and stand facing one another outside the sanctuary before the holy doors as at the Little Entrance. The principal Priest exclaims: "Our most holy [Pontiff]" and stands exactly before the holy doors, turns to the west when he exclaims "All of you," after which he enters the sanctuary, and behind him go the concelebrants and each stands at the holy table at his place.
205. Having made the Great Entrance, if there is no deacon, one of the concelebrants sings the first part of the litany "Let us complete," and another - the second part, so that each has time to read the Prayer of the Offering.
206. When the principal priest kisses the Holy Gifts, the concelebrants one by one approach the holy table, according to the order of their dignity. The principal priest, having stepped back slightly from the holy table, turns to the right side and looks to the north, and each concelebrant kisses first the Holy Gifts, and then the left and right shoulder of the principal priest and stands to his left, slightly behind. The second concelebrant kisses first the Holy Gifts, then - the principal celebrant, and at the end - the first concelebrant and stands on his right side. All others do likewise. The principal Priest says: "Christ is in our midst," and the concelebrant responds: "He is and shall be." Likewise do also the others, who kiss one another.
After the kiss of peace the celebrant returns before the holy table; the 1st concelebrant takes one edge of the aer, and the 2nd - the second edge and fan with it over the Gifts. All others stand in their places and quietly recite the Symbol of Faith.
207. The concelebrants offering the sacrifice point with their hand to the holy diskos, and then to the holy chalice, just as the principal celebrant, simultaneously, slowly and attentively, sing the words of consecration, recite together "Thine own of Thine own," but only the principal celebrant blesses the Gifts. The same applies also to the Epiclesis.
One must ensure, especially in the Liturgy of St. Basil, that after the reading of the prayer which immediately precedes the consecration, all together with the serving priest exclaim from the beginning to the end the words of consecration. It will also be good if the principal celebrant pronounces the last words of this prayer louder so that the concelebrants can hear them, and watches that all are ready already for the simultaneous exclamation of the words of consecration (see no. 134).
208. The first part of the litany "Having commemorated all the saints" is sung by one of the concelebrants, if there is no deacon, and the second part - by another, so that all have time to read the prayer "To Thee we entrust all our life."
209. After the breaking [of the Lamb], the principal celebrant calls the Deacon and gives him a particle of the Holy Bread, as prescribed. Then all recite the prayer "I believe, O Lord" and the principal priest communicates of the Body of Christ. All concelebrants, in turn, according to their dignity, approach the holy table from the side of the oblation table, and the principal celebrant stands on the opposite side of it. After the communion of the Body of Christ, each goes to the north of the holy table and washes, if necessary, His fingers in the vessel standing on the table of oblation, and, according to the prescribed sequence, they go behind the 1st concelebrant, who stands at his place at the holy table. The Deacon consumes the particle of Bread after the priests. The principal celebrant, having returned to the center, communicates of the Most Precious Blood and moves away from the holy table; after this the concelebrants, according to the prescribed order, approach the holy table, this time from the southern side, and each after the communion of the Blood departs by the table of oblation and stands at his place at the holy table. At the end the Deacon receives, according to the prescription, the communion of the Most Precious Blood from the principal celebrant.
210. Each, having just communicated, wipes his lips with the purificator at the edge of the chalice.
211. The Prayer behind the Ambo is exclaimed, standing between the two choirs, by the principal celebrant. Only after the dismissal and after the holy doors are closed does each take off the sacred vestments.
6) In the Ordinary, or Private Form
212. There is no non-actual celebrant, or assistant, at the ordinary or private service.
213. Everything that was said about concelebration in the solemn form is valid also for concelebration in the ordinary or private form, with the following exceptions:
214. In seminaries and houses of religious education it will be good if the Deacon participates in the celebration of the Divine Liturgy also when serving with the simple rite and if ordinary singing is used. Here, however, it is recommended to observe the rules which are binding for simple concelebration without a Deacon.
215. If there is no time for the recitation of the preparatory prayers before the iconostasis, which all concelebrants recite together or each separately, it is never permitted to omit the prayer "O Lord, stretch forth Thy hand." Having entered the sanctuary, they recite the psalm "I will enter into Thy house" and, having kissed the holy table, the Gospel and, if there exists a custom, - the altar cross, they put on the priestly vestments (see no. 178).
216. The members of the litanies are distributed among the concelebrants and are sung so that the one who does not sing the litanies has time to recite the corresponding prayer without haste.
If there be two concelebrants, they sing the liturgical litanies alternately, having recited first quietly the corresponding prayer of each litany, but the prayer of the Great Litany and the Prayer of Thanksgiving after communion they recite quietly after the litany, but before the exclamation. It should also be noted that the first part of the litany after the Great Entrance and the litanies after the Anaphora are said by the second priest, who after that recites quietly the prayer; and the second part with the exclamation is recited by the first.
If there be three concelebrants, then the 1st says the Great Litany, the 2nd - the first Small Litany, the 3rd - the second Small Litany; the 1st - again the Litany after the Gospel; the 2nd - the Litany of the Catechumens; the 3rd - the first Small Litany of the Faithful, and the 1st - the second; the 2nd - the first part of the litany after the Entrance and after the Anaphora, and the 3rd - the second part of those litanies; at the end the 1st - the Thanksgiving Litany after communion.
Such a method of distribution of various litanies among individual concelebrants is not prescribed absolutely, but only recommended to be used for greater convenience.
217. It is not required that all concelebrants go out for the Little Entrance, but if they go out, then the one who is the 1st among them carries the Gospel, he himself recites the Prayer of the Entrance and imparts the blessing. But it is always required that those standing before the holy table or on its right side, before they go out, go around the holy table and go out behind the holy doors.
218. There will be no blessing of the High Throne and all must remain near the throne during the reading of the Apostle.
219. For the Great Entrance not all have to go out. If only the 1st makes the Entrance, he himself places the aer on his left shoulder and himself exclaims: "Our most holy [Pontiff]." If all go out, then each does not have to take some object used for the Divine Sacrifice, only the 2nd concelebrant takes the holy diskos, which he holds on his head, and the 1st - the holy chalice; the 2nd exclaims: "All of you, Orthodox Christians," and the 1st: "Our most holy [Pontiff]." Others exclaim nothing (see no. 200).
220. Everything else that the Deacon is supposed to say or do, according to what was said about the celebration of the Liturgy without a Deacon (comp. nos. 164-174), the concelebrant says and does. The one who serves the Proskomedia also cleanses the holy vessels after communion.
VI. Rubric of the Liturgy of Presanctified Gifts
221. On the Holy and Great Forty Days [Lent] at the Proskomedia of the Divine Liturgy on Sunday or on the last day before the Liturgy of Presanctified Gifts, besides the Lamb that is to be consecrated on that day, other Lambs are also prepared for those Liturgies of Presanctified Gifts that are to be celebrated on the following days. Having cut, sacrificed and pierced the first Lamb, the Priest performs the same rites also over the other Lambs, reciting at each of them: "In remembrance," "As a sheep," "Sacrificed," "One of the soldiers" and places them one near another on the diskos. Then he pours wine and water into the holy chalice, having recited what is prescribed and, according to custom, finishes the Proskomedia.
222. When the Lamb is to be blessed at the invocation of the Holy Spirit, He says: "And make this Bread" in the singular, and not in the plural, for Christ is - only one.
223. At the elevation he elevates simultaneously all consecrated Lambs; breaks only the first Lamb, places a part into the holy chalice and pours warm water when prescribed. After this he takes the other holy Lambs and places them in the pyx in the tabernacle.
224. Then, according to custom, the Priest recites the prayers, communicates and finishes the sacrifice according to the prescription.
1. In Concelebration of One Deacon
225. For the reading of the Hours, the Priest in the epitrachelion stands before the holy doors and begins: "Blessed is our God." Reader: "Amen," "O Heavenly King" and the rest. After "Our Father" the Priest, having said the exclamation, enters the sanctuary through the southern doors. The 3rd, 6th, 9th Hours are read, as well as the Typika.
226. At the end of the Typika the Priest and deacon vest in the sacred vestments as usual, but putting on each [vestment] they say nothing more, but only "Let us pray to the Lord."
227. When the Reader finishes the Typika, having recited the Trisagion, "Our Father," "Lord, have mercy" (12) and the prayer "Most Holy Trinity," the holy doors are opened. Priest: "Wisdom." Choir: "More honorable than the Cherubim." Priest: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God." Choir: "Glory, Both now," "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Bless." The Priest makes the dismissal with the commemoration of the holy temple and the holy day. After this the holy doors are closed again.
228. The Priest accompanied by the Deacon makes three small bows before the holy table and recites only: "O God, be merciful to me a sinner." They kiss, as was already noted, the Holy Gospel, the holy table and the altar cross. Then the Deacon, having received permission from the Priest, goes out through the northern doors and, having stood at the usual place, makes three small bows, saying nothing and says: "Bless, Master." The Priest, standing before the holy table and making with the Holy Gospel the sign of the cross over it, exclaims: "Blessed is the kingdom." Choir: "Amen."
Immediately the Reader: "Come, let us worship" (3) and reads the opening psalm (see nos. 102, 118, 119, note).
224. The Deacon returns into the sanctuary through the southern doors, and the Priest, having stood before the holy doors, reads the Vespers (Lamp-lighting) Prayers from the fourth to the eighth, for the first three he will read later, at the Antiphons.
225. At the end of the opening psalm the Priest returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary, and the Deacon, having gone out through the northern and stood at the usual place, sings the Great Litany. After the exclamation, having made a small bow, he returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary. The Reader begins the 18th Kathisma of the Psalter. At "Alleluia" - they make small bows. When at each of the following Antiphons "Glory" is said, the Deacon goes out through the northern doors from the sanctuary and at the designated place sings the Small Litany, and the Priest recites quietly the first, second and third Vespers Prayers. After the completion of the Small Litany the Deacon returns through the southern doors into the sanctuary, and the Priest says the exclamation, as prescribed.
226. At the beginning of the reading of the psalms [stichologia], if the Presanctified Lamb is kept in the tabernacle (artophorion) of the holy table, the transfer to the table of oblation takes place thus[^785]: the Deacon brings to the holy table the holy diskos, the star-cover and the small veil. The Priest kisses the Holy Gospel and places it on the right side of the holy table. After this he places the diskos on the unfolded antimension [iliton], on its left side, and, having opened the tabernacle, makes a small bow. He takes the chalice with the lid, in which the Lamb is kept, places it on the middle of the antimension [iliton] and, having taken from it the Presanctified Bread, places it with great piety on the holy diskos, as also the particles needed for the communion of the faithful. Having placed the pyx back into the tabernacle, he closes it and, having placed the holy diskos on the middle of the antimension [iliton], censes the star-cover and the small veil and covers the diskos with it. Having taken the censer, he censes around the holy table, preceded by the Deacon with a lighted candle. Having returned before the holy table and given the censer to the Deacon, he makes a low (prostrate) bow, making the sign of the cross on himself, after which he takes with both hands the covered holy diskos and, holding it on his head crosses by the right side of the holy table to the table of oblation (altar of preparation), preceded by the Deacon with a lighted candle and censer.
227. At the table of oblation the Priest places the diskos on the unfolded antimension [iliton], after which he pours wine and water into the chalice, as is the custom, saying nothing at this. After censing the veil of the chalice over the censer he covers the chalice with it. Then with the large veil, which he likewise censes, he covers the diskos and chalice, saying nothing at this, but only: "Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us." Having made a prostrate bow, the Priest and deacon return to the holy table. There the Priest places the Book of the Holy Gospels on the folded antimension [iliton].
228. If the Presanctified Lamb is kept in the tabernacle which is located on the table of oblation, then at the beginning of the reading of the psalms [stichologia] the Priest and deacon go to the table of oblation. Both make a small bow before it, the Priest opens the tabernacle and, having made again a small bow, censes with three swings the Presanctified Gifts. Then he takes the Presanctified Bread from the pyx and places it with great piety on the diskos, and pours into the holy chalice, according to custom, wine and water, saying nothing. He takes the censer, censes the star-cover and veils, covers the diskos and chalice, each - with its own veil and both - with the large veil (aer), saying nothing, but only: "Through the prayers of the holy fathers." Having made a prostrate bow, he returns to the holy table.
224. If the Priest deems it appropriate, he finishes the rite of placing the Lamb on the diskos during the reading of the first Antiphon, the censing - during the second, and the transfer of the Presanctified Gifts - during the reading of the third Antiphon.
225. If a larger number of faithful is expected for communion, so that the Presanctified Bread alone will not suffice, the Priest places the appropriate number of already consecrated particles on the diskos, and on top of them - the Lamb Itself.
226. After the completion of the reading of the psalms [stichologia] the Choir begins the psalm "Lord, I have cried," and the Deacon censes according to the prescription (see no. 33), at this he censes the Presanctified Gifts - three times, each time - with three swings.
227. During the singing of "Glory, Both now" the holy doors are opened and the Entrance takes place in the usual manner. The Deacon censes, if there be an Entrance with the Gospel, and makes the Entrance with the Gospel.
228. When the Deacon says in a low voice: "Let us pray to the Lord," the Priest recites quietly the Prayer of the Entrance with its exclamation and, after the completion of the stichera, the Deacon exclaims: "Wisdom, arise." Choir: "O Gladsome Light." They enter the sanctuary, then the Deacon, turned to the holy doors, says: "Let us be attentive." The Priest, having turned to the people, blesses: "Peace be to all." Deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." The Choir sings the Prokimenon of the first Paremia. Deacon: "Wisdom." Reader, having stood in the middle between the two choirs and looking to the east: "The reading from the Book of Genesis." Deacon: "Let us be attentive." The Reader reads the first Paremia. After this the Choir sings the second Prokimenon.
224. Immediately after the second Prokimenon the Deacon says to the Priest: "Command," and the Priest takes with both hands the lighted candle and simultaneously the censer, stands before the holy table, looking to the east and, making the sign of the cross, exclaims: "Wisdom, arise." After this he turns to the west, towards the people, makes again the sign of the cross and says in a raised voice: "The Light of Christ illumines all." At these words all Who are in the sanctuary and in the church make three great prostrations. The Priest turns again to the east and gives the candle and censer to the server. Reader: "The reading from the Book of Proverbs." Deacon: "Let us be attentive." The holy doors are closed and the second Paremia is read.
225. After the completion of the second Paremia the Priest says to the Reader: "Peace be to Thee," and the Deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." After this the Deacon, having taken a lighted candle, approaches the Priest.
The Reader, who stands in the middle between the two choirs, or rather the Priest, who stands in the sanctuary before the holy table and censes, sings: "Let my prayer be set forth."
After the singing of this verse by the Reader or priest, the Choir sings it once more.
Then again the Reader or priest, who now, accompanied by the Deacon going in front, stands on the southern side of the holy table and censes there, sings the first verse of the 140th Psalm: "Lord, I have cried," and the Choir repeats: "Let my prayer be set forth."
And again the Reader or priest, accompanied by the Deacon, stands at the east of the holy table, censes there and sings the second verse of the psalm: "Set, O Lord, a watch before my mouth," and the Choir sings: "Let my prayer be set forth."
After this the Reader or priest, preceded by the Deacon, stands on the northern side of the holy table, censes there and sings the third verse of the psalm: "Incline not my heart," and the Choir sings: "Let my prayer be set forth."
And once more the Reader or priest accompanied by the Deacon, again stands before the throne, censes there and sings: "Let my prayer be set forth as incense before Thee," and the Choir finishes: "the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice."
226. It should be noted that during the singing by the Reader or priest of "Let my prayer be set forth" or the verse, the Priest censes the holy table with three swings at the beginning and at the end of each verse which he sings. At this time the Choir and the faithful pray on their knees. When the Choir sings the Priest, having given the censer to the server, and all who are in the sanctuary, pray likewise on their knees. After the completion all bow three times.
227. If on these days of Lent falls the memory of a certain saint or a temple feast, having opened the holy doors, the Deacon exclaims: "Let us be attentive," and the Reader reads the Prokimenon of the Apostle, after which the Apostle and Gospel are read, as prescribed.
228. The holy doors are closed and the Deacon, having received permission from the Priest, goes out through the northern doors and, having stood at the designated place, sings the litany "Let us all say." Everything else takes place according to the prescription until the very exclamation of the prayer for the catechumens, after which the Priest, having laid aside the Gospel, unfolds the antimension [iliton] on the holy table.
224. From Wednesday of the fourth week of Great Lent, which is the midpoint of the Forty Days, after the exclamation "That with us they also," the Deacon dismisses the catechumens, and having invited to prayer those preparing for holy baptism: "All catechumens, depart. Catechumens, depart. All who are for illumination, approach" and so it is sung at all services of the Presanctified, even if a feast day fell, with the exception of Saturday and Sunday.
After this follow the prayers of the faithful, according to the prescription.
225. After the exclamation "According to the gift of Thy Christ" Choir: "Amen" and sings the hymn "Now the Powers of Heaven." The Deacon, having returned through the northern doors into the sanctuary, opens the holy doors and, having taken the censer, censes with three swings only the front of the throne, then - the table of oblation and the Priest. Then he stands before the throne to the right of the Priest and holds the censer on the ring finger of his left hand. The Priest and deacon, with hands raised up, recite together "Now the Powers of Heaven" three times, each time making a small bow.
226. Then they go directly to the table of oblation. There the Priest, having taken the censer, censes with three swings the Presanctified Gifts, saying nothing at this, takes the large veil (aer) and places it on the left shoulder of the Deacon, then takes the covered holy diskos with his right hand and holds it on his head, and the chalice with wine - with his left hand at his chest.
227. If, however, the diskos should not have a foot, the Priest places it on the covered chalice, which he holds with his left hand, and with his right hand holds the veil over the holy diskos and carries the chalice like a diskos to his forehead.
228. They go out of the sanctuary through the northern doors, in front walks the Deacon, who frequently censes the Holy Gifts. During the procession no one says anything. When they enter through the holy doors into the sanctuary, the Priest places the holy diskos on the throne on the left, and the holy chalice - on the right side, removes the small veils from the diskos and chalice and places them on the holy table, and with the aer, which he takes from the shoulder of the Deacon and censes over the censer, covers the Holy Gifts, saying nothing, but only censing the Holy Gifts thrice. After the completion of the hymn "Now the Powers of Heaven" all make three great prostrations, after which the holy doors are closed and the curtain is drawn shut.
224. The Deacon, having bowed to the Priest, goes out through the northern doors and, having stood at the usual place, exclaims: "Let us complete," "Help us, save us, have mercy." The Priest exclaims: "And vouchsafe us, O Master," and the people: "Our Father." The Deacon girds himself with the orarion crosswise, as at the Liturgy of Chrysostom.
225. According to the prescription follows the bowing of heads, and after the prayer "Look down, O Lord Jesus Christ" the Priest and deacon make three small bows, after which the Priest does not undercover the Holy Gifts, but, placing his right hand under the aer, touches the Life-giving Bread piously and with fear, and at the words of the Deacon "Let us be attentive" exclaims: "The Presanctified Holy Things to the holy."
Then the Priest removes the aer and, having folded it, places it aside, as also the star-cover. The Deacon enters through the southern doors into the sanctuary, stands to the right of the Priest and, having made a small bow, says: "Break, Master, the Holy Bread," and the Priest breaks it and places the four parts on the diskos just as it takes place at the Liturgy of Chrysostom, and the particle with the inscription "IC" he places into the holy chalice, saying nothing. The Deacon pours a little warm water into the chalice, if there exists a custom, saying nothing and stands somewhat to the side. The Choir sings the Communion Hymn "Taste and see," and also a second one, if the Apostle and Gospel of some saint or temple saint were read.
226. The Priest and deacon communicate according to custom of the Holy Bread. Then the Priest wipes his fingers with a sponge, if there is a custom to use it, and, having kissed it, places it on its place.
The Deacon wipes the holy chalice, saying nothing and, having made three small bows, after the curtain of the iconostasis has been drawn open, opens the holy doors. Having received the chalice from the Priest, he approaches the holy doors and, lifting it, shows it to the people, saying: "Draw near." Choir: "I will bless the Lord at all times. Alleluia." The communion of the faithful takes place just as at the Liturgy of Chrysostom, and the Priest, giving the Holy Bread, says the words of this Liturgy "The precious and most holy." The transfer of the holy diskos takes place just as at the Liturgy of Chrysostom.
The Priest makes a small bow, takes the holy chalice, turns to the holy doors, looking at the people, says quietly: "Blessed is God," and then exclaims: "Always, now and ever."
227. Everything else takes place just as at the Liturgy of Chrysostom. However, it should be noted that: 1) at the dismissal of this Liturgy the author is not mentioned; 2) in the three first days of Passion Week one must say the dismissal of Palm Sunday at Vespers: "Christ, our true God, Who came to His voluntary Passion."
After the completion of the Liturgy of Presanctified Gifts the Priest and deacon take off the holy vestments, saying nothing.
2. In Concelebration of Two Deacons
228. After the completion of the Hours and after the dismissal at the end of the Typika the holy doors are closed, the Priest and deacons make before the holy table three small bows each, saying: "O God, be merciful to me a sinner" and kiss the Holy Gospel, the edge of the holy table and the altar cross, as usual. After this the 1st deacon, having paid respect to the Priest, goes out through the northern doors and, having stood at his place before the holy doors, makes three small bows, saying nothing, after which he exclaims: "Bless, Master." Priest: "Blessed is the kingdom." Choir: "Amen" and the Reader reads the opening psalm. The Priest, having gone out through the northern doors, reads the Vespers Prayers, from the fourth to the eighth.
At the end of the opening psalm the 1st deacon goes out through the northern doors and sings the Great Litany. After the exclamation "For to Thee belongs" the Deacon returns into the sanctuary.
224. The first deacon assists the Priest during the placing of the Presanctified Lamb on the diskos and its transfer to the table of oblation, and the 2nd deacon goes out through the northern doors and sings the first Small Litany. The 1st deacon sings - the second and finally the 2nd deacon - the third.
225. The censing on the psalm "Lord, I have cried" and the entrance take place just as at Vespers in concelebration with two deacons (see no. 39). Having returned into the sanctuary, the 1st Deacon exclaims from the holy doors: "Let us be attentive." The Priest, turned to the people: "Peace be to all." 2nd deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." The Choir sings the Prokimenon of the first Paremia. 1st deacon: "Wisdom." Reader: "The reading from the Book of Genesis." 2nd deacon: "Let us be attentive." The Reader reads the first Paremia, after which the Choir sings the second Prokimenon. After the second Prokimenon the 1st deacon, turning to the Priest, says: "Command." The Priest takes the candle and censer and makes the sign of the holy cross, as was said above. Reader: "The reading from the Book of Proverbs." 2nd deacon: "Let us be attentive."
226. After the second reading of the Old Testament both deacons go before the Priest when he censes the holy table and sings: "Let my prayer be set forth" with the verses of the 140th Psalm.
227. If the memory of some saint or a temple feast falls, the 2nd Deacon exclaims: "Let us be attentive." After the Prokimenon of the Apostle the 1st deacon: "Wisdom." After the reading by the Reader of the title of the Apostle the 2nd deacon: "Let us be attentive."
After the completion of the reading of the Apostle the Priest says: "Peace be to Thee." 1st deacon: "Wisdom, let us be attentive." Choir sings "Alleluia".
The censing before the Gospel takes place just as at the Liturgy of Chrysostom in concelebration of two deacons (see no. 155). Then the 1st deacon: "Bless, Master, the proclaimer." Priest: "May God, through the prayers" and gives Him the Gospel. 2nd deacon: "Wisdom, arise, let us hear the Holy Gospel." Priest: "Peace be to all." 1st deacon, having stood on the ambo or somewhat before the holy doors: "The reading from the Holy Gospel according to (Name)." 2nd deacon: "Let us be attentive" and everything else, as is customary.
228. After the reading of the Gospel the deacons, having gone out through their doors, stand at the designated places. 1st deacon begins: "Let us all say." Then 2nd deacon: "Pray, ye catechumens." 1st deacon: "All catechumens." 2nd deacon: "Catechumens, depart" and again 1st deacon: "Only the faithful."
From the Wednesday of the fourth week of Lent they sing thus, as is given further. 1st deacon: "All catechumens." 2nd deacon: "Catechumens, depart." Again 1st deacon: "All who are for illumination, approach. Pray, ye who are for illumination." Choir: "Lord, have mercy," and the 1st deacon: "Ye faithful, for the brethren who are preparing for holy illumination." Priest - exclamation: "For Thou Art our enlightenment." 1st deacon: "All who are for illumination, depart." Again 1st deacon: "Only the faithful."
Then 1st deacon: "Help us, save us, have mercy," "Wisdom." 2nd deacon: "Again and again," "Help us, save us, have mercy," "Wisdom." The deacons enter through their doors into the sanctuary.
224. During the singing of the hymn "Now the Powers of Heaven" the holy doors are opened and the deacons, having taken censers, cense with three swings (thrice) only the front of the holy table, then - the table of oblation and the Priest. After this they stand to the right and left of the Priest, holding the censers on one of the fingers of the left hand, and recite with the Priest three times the hymn "Now the Powers of Heaven."
Then they go straight to the table of oblation. There the Priest censes the Presanctified [Gifts] and, having taken the aer, places it on the left shoulder of the 1st deacon, and all go out in the usual manner. In front go both deacons and frequently cense the Holy Gifts.
225. After the holy diskos and the holy chalice are placed on the holy table, the deacons go out through their doors and stand at the usual places. 1st Deacon exclaims: "Let us complete." At "Our Father" the deacons gird themselves with the oraria crosswise. 2nd deacon: "Bow our heads unto the Lord." After three small bows the 1st Deacon exclaims "Let us be attentive" and after the exclamation of the Priest "The Presanctified Holy Things to the holy" both deacons return through their doors into the sanctuary.
1st deacon: "Break, Master, the Holy Bread." The deacons communicate of the Holy Bread, according to custom. After the communion of the Priest and deacons, the 1st deacon wipes the holy diskos over the holy chalice and calls: "Draw near."
The rest takes place just as at the Liturgy of Chrysostom.
3. Without a Deacon
226. If this Liturgy is celebrated without a Deacon, the Priest exclaims everything that belongs to the Deacon, as has already been said in the rubric of Vespers and the Divine Liturgy of John Chrysostom.
227. When the Priest censes the holy table and transfers the Holy Gifts to the table of oblation, the server, holding a lighted candle, walks before him. Small litanies and exclamations the Priest says, if possible, before the holy table.
228. During the singing of "Let my prayer be set forth" the server walks with a lighted candle before the Priest.
224. At the Great Entrance candle-bearers, if there be such, turned to the northern doors and arranged in order, accompany the Presanctified Lamb. After they arrive before the holy doors they stand together on both sides, and then return to their places.
4. In Concelebration of Priests
225. The rules of concelebration of the Liturgy of Presanctified Gifts - are the same as of Vespers and the Liturgy of Chrysostom. Only one must keep in mind that:
- At the end of the Typika concelebrants vest in sacred vestments, saying when putting on each only: "Let us pray to the Lord."
- The principal celebrant exclaims: "For to Thee belongs," "For a merciful," "According to the gift of Thy Christ," "For Thou Art our sanctification." Other exclamations are exclaimed by concelebrants in turn.
- At "Let my prayer be set forth" concelebrants remain in their places, stepping back slightly from the holy table when the principal celebrant needs to pass, together with the principal [celebrant] they bend their knees and rise.
