PART II
GENERAL RUBRICS FOR VARIOUS SERVICES OF THE OCTOECHOS AND MENAION
There are 20 such rubrics, or paradigms of general divine services -- that is, 7 outside a feast, and 13 within a feast, as presented below:
OUTSIDE A FEAST
1.	Saint without Polyeleos on Sunday
2.	Saint without Polyeleos on weekdays, except Saturday
3.	Saint without Polyeleos on Saturday
4.	Saint with Polyeleos on Sunday
5.	Saint with Polyeleos on weekdays
6.	Saint with All-Night Vigil on Sunday
7.	Saint with All-Night Vigil on weekdays
WITHIN A FEAST
In a Forefeast
1.	Forefeast on Sunday with a Saint without Polyeleos
2.	Forefeast on a weekday with a Saint without Polyeleos
In a Feast
3.	Feast of the Lord on Sunday and weekdays
4.	Feast of the Theotokos on Sunday
5.	Feast of the Theotokos on weekdays
In an Afterfeast
6.	Afterfeast on Sunday with a Saint without Polyeleos
7.	Afterfeast on a weekday with a Saint without Polyeleos
8.	Afterfeast on Sunday with a Saint with Polyeleos
9.	Afterfeast on a weekday with a Saint with Polyeleos
10.	Afterfeast on Sunday with a Saint with All-Night Vigil[^44]
11.	Afterfeast on a weekday with a Saint with All-Night Vigil
In the Apodosis of a Feast
12.	Apodosis of a Feast of the Lord and the Theotokos on Sunday
13.	Apodosis of a Feast of the Lord and the Theotokos on a weekday
Note
A Saint without Polyeleos may be [sung] on 4 or on 6. The designation of a saint "on 4" or "on 6" depends on the number of troparia in each Ode of his Canon at Matins. There are three cases of a Saint without Polyeleos: that is, there may occur only one saint on 4, or two on 4, or one on 6. When we say one or two saints, we understand them as having separate services, for there may be several saints [commemorated], but they have only one service. The ecclesiastical rubric does not provide for more than two services to saints [on one day][^45].
Now we shall present the order for each of the 20 aforementioned cases.
SAINT WITHOUT POLYELEOS ON A SUNDAY
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma 1 "Blessed is the man" - whole, according to the Typikon. By our custom today, only certain selected verses of it are sung, which are contained in the church hymnal.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera, that is, of the Octoechos of the resurrection of the current tone - 7 and of the Menaion (or Anthologion) to the saint, which is in the order of the Menology - 3. Also Glory, Both now: theotokion 1st of the current tone (Dogmatikon) from the Octoechos, or, as usual, from the Heirmologion, according to the musical notations. If there be a Doxastikon to the saint, then Glory: Doxastikon to the saint, also Both now: 1st theotokion of the current tone[^46].
o	If two saints occur, then there shall be 4 stichera of the Octoechos and of the Menaion to the first saint - 3, and to the second - 2, also Glory, Both now: 1st theotokion of the tone[^47]. If there be a Doxastikon to the first saint, then Glory: his Doxastikon, also Both now: 1st theotokion of the tone.
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then there shall be 6 stichera of the Octoechos and of the Menaion to the saint - 4, also Glory: to the saint, and Both now: 1st theotokion of the current tone.
3.	Great Sunday Prokimenon "The Lord is King"[^48].
4.	On the Aposticha - stichera of the resurrection of the current tone. If there be a Doxastikon to the saint, then Glory: to the saint, Both now: theotokion of the Sunday Aposticha of the Octoechos in the tone of the Doxastikon[^49].
5.	Troparia: first of the resurrection of the current tone, also Glory: of the saint, Both now: theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the saint's troparion (New Greek Constantinopolitan Typikon, p. 77).
o	If two saints occur, then the troparion of the resurrection and of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the second[^50].
6.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of the Sunday service, of the first saint and of the second, if there be one[^51].
Note
For the convenience of finding the theotokion which is used at Vespers and at Matins in the tone of the saint's Doxastikon, at the end of every volume of the Menaion (as also in the Anthologion) are given all the theotokia that are taken on "Lord, I have cried" and on the Aposticha, and after the troparia of the saint, in the order of the eight tones and days of the week, primarily the Sunday ones, as well as the daily ones.
AT COMPLINE
1.	Canon of the Theotokos of the Octoechos of the current tone, obligatorily as in the Octoechos, that is, every ode with the Heirmos on 5, without Katavasias and without Litanies, only after the 6th Ode - "Lord, have mercy" (3), also "Glory, Both now" and the Sessional Hymn (sometimes the Kontakion)[^52].
2.	Troparia after "It is truly meet" will not be said, unless one Hypakoe of the current tone from the Horologion (among the Sunday troparia)[^53].
3.	Dismissal: from "Glory to Thee, O Christ God" with the response "Glory, Both now", "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Lord, bless"[^54].
AT THE Midnight Office
Canon of the Octoechos of the current tone, obligatorily as in the Octoechos, that is, with the Heirmos on 5, without Katavasias and without Litanies; only after the 3rd and 6th Ode - "Lord, have mercy" (3) and Sessional Hymn.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": troparion of the resurrection of the current tone twice, Glory: of the saint, Both now: theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the saint's troparion.
o	If two saints occur, then the troparion of the resurrection once and of the first saint once, Glory: of the second once, Both now: theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the second[^55].
2.	Kathismata: two of the current tone, after each of which - the Small Litany with the Sunday Sessional Hymns according to the Octoechos[^56]. Also Kathisma 17 ("The Blameless"), or 19 (Polyeleos): 17th - on Sundays between the Apodosis of the Holy Cross (September 21) and the Forefeast of the Nativity of Christ (December 20); 19th - on Sundays between the Apodosis of Theophany (January 14) and the 1st Sunday of Great Lent[^57]. After Kathisma 17 or 19 - immediately "The Angelic Host", Small Litany and Hypakoe of the current tone.
3.	Gradual (Gradual) of the current tone from the Octoechos, or from the Heirmologion.
4.	Prokimenon of the resurrection of the current tone from the Octoechos, or from the Heirmologion.
5.	Gospel - one of the eleven Sunday Gospels.
6.	Stichera of the resurrection "Having Beheld the Resurrection of Christ".
7.	Canons 4 on 14: three of the Octoechos of the current tone on 10 and one of the Menaion to the saint on 4. Of the three canons of the Octoechos: the first, of the resurrection, is taken with the Heirmos on 4, the second, of the Cross-Resurrection - without the Heirmos on 3 and the third, of the Theotokos - also without the Heirmos on 3. At the end - the fourth from the Menaion of the saint, without the Heirmos on 4. For the Heirmoi of only the first canon are taken, and the others are not taken. They are given only to serve as a model for the singing of the troparia that follow them, which were once all sung according to their pattern. After every Ode - the designated Katavasia (Heirmos of the first canon of the feast[^58], for usually there are two canons), the scheme of which is given at the end of this Typikon. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion and Ikos of the 6th Ode. Songs of the saint, if there be (for the Menaion does not always give a Kontakion-Ikos), and Sessional Hymn of the saint. After the 6th Ode - Kontakion and Ikos of the resurrection, at the 8th Ode, before its Katavasia - the refrain "We praise", we sing to the melody of the refrain of the Heirmologic hymns, in the tone of the Katavasia. At the 9th Ode we sing "My soul magnifies" with "More honorable". After the 9th Ode - "Holy is the Lord our God" (3), in the tone of the current Prokimenon and the Exaposteilarion (Hymn of Light), one of the eleven, corresponding to the number of the Sunday Gospel, also Glory: Exaposteilarion of the saint, if there be, Both now: theotokion of the Sunday Exaposteilarion[^59].
o	If two saints occur, then there shall be two canons from the Octoechos on 6, that is: Resurrection with Heirmos on 4 and of the Theotokos on 2[^123], two of the Menaion on 8, that is, to the first saint on 4 and to the second on 4. After every Ode the designated Katavasia. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion and Ikos of the first and second saint, if there be; also Sessional Hymn of the first without theotokion, Glory: of the second, Both now: his theotokion[^60]. After the 6th Ode - Kontakion and Ikos of the resurrection. After the 9th - Sunday Exaposteilarion, also, if there be in the Menaion, of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: theotokion of the Sunday Exaposteilarion[^61].
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then there shall be the Resurrection Canon with Heirmos on 4 and Cross-Resurrection on 2, of the Theotokos on 2 and of the saint on 6[^62].
8.	Praises (Lauds) stichera of the Sunday Octoechos of the current tone - 8, also Glory: Gospel sticheron, one of the eleven, corresponding to the Sunday Gospel of Matins, Both now: "Most Blessed Art Thou" from the Horologion, according to the rite of Matins. Refrains for the aforementioned 8 stichera are not all selected from the Psalms of Praise, but only 6, because for the 7th and 8th separate refrains are sung: for the 7th - "Arise, O Lord", and for the 8th - "I will confess".
o	If the saint on 6 has stichera on the Praises, then there shall be 4 of the resurrection and 4 of the saint with Glory, with two of his refrains[^63].
9.	After the Great Doxology - Sunday Troparion "Today salvation has come to the world", when the tone is odd, that is 1st, 3rd, 6th, 9th, or "Having risen from the tomb", when the tone is even, that is 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th.
10.	Dismissal great, as at Vespers, with the commemoration of the Sunday service and of the saint, the first and the second, if there be.
AT THE HOURS
1.	Troparia: Sunday - at all hours, also "Glory" at the 3rd and 9th - also to the saint, at the 6th - to the patron[^64] of the church. Kontakia: at the 1st and 9th - Sunday, at the 3rd - to the saint, at the 6th - to the patron.
o	If two saints occur, then the Sunday troparion - at all hours, also "Glory" at the 3rd and 6th - to the saint, at the 6th - to the patron, at the 9th - to the second. Kontakia - alternating, that is: at the 1st - Sunday, at the 3rd - to the first, at the 6th - to the patron, at the 9th - to the second saint[^65].
2.	Dismissal: from "Glory to Thee, O Christ God", with the commemoration of the Sunday and the saint, the first, and the second, if there be.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Antiphons: the first two - Sunday, from the very day of the Resurrection, 3rd - the usual "Come", with the Sunday refrain (in monasteries - the Beatitudes)[^66].
2.	Sunday Troparion, Glory: Sunday Kontakion, Both now: Theotokion Kontakion, one of the feasts of the Theotokos, in the tone of the Doxastikon of the Sunday Kontakion, or the Kontakion of the church, if it is of the Theotokos, if - not, then the theotokion from the Sunday ones, in the tone of the Sunday Kontakion[^67], or the general one - "O Protection of Christians"[^68].
3.	Prokimenon, Alleluia - Sunday, of the current tone.
4.	Apostle, Gospel - sequential Sunday.
5.	Communion Hymn - Sunday "Praise the Lord"[^69].
Note
If a service for some need is also taken, it is preceded by the Sunday service. We replace the Kontakion of the supplication with the Theotokion of the supplication, if there is one, if - not, then with the Kontakion of the supplication, as the Lord's.
SAINT WITHOUT POLYELEOS ON WEEKDAYS (EXCEPT SATURDAY)
AT VESPERS
1.	Kathisma current[^70]. On Sunday evening, in view of the All-Night Vigil which sometimes occurs, the Kathisma is not taken; on the eves of feasts for which the Typikon prescribes an All-Night Vigil, the current Kathisma is not taken.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera[^130]: of the Octoechos of the current tone - 3[^71] and from the Menaion of the saint - 3. Glory, Both now: theotokion (or Stavrotheotokion) which follows the stichera of the saint. If in the Menaion there is a Doxastikon to the saint, then we sing Glory: Doxastikon, Both now: theotokion of the Octoechos in the tone of the Doxastikon and of the day of the week, from "Lord, I have cried". Such a Doxastikon, according to the rubrics of the Greek Typikon, is sung by both choirs together ενοὐμένων των δυο χορών. (Καιφ. ε.)[^72].
o	If two saints occur, then the stichera of the Octoechos are not sung, but we sing from the Menaion to the first saint - 3 and to the second - 3, Glory, Both now: theotokion (or Stavrotheotokion) which is after the stichera of the second saint. If the first saint has a Doxastikon, then the theotokion is also selected for it, as above for a single saint.
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then nothing is taken from the Octoechos, but we sing all 6 stichera only to the saint. To his Doxastikon we select the usual theotokion in the tone of the Doxastikon and of the day of the week.
3.	Prokimenon of the day of the week, which is in the order of Vespers in the Horologion.
4.	On the Aposticha: all stichera from the Octoechos, with the two refrains given in the Horologion in the order of Vespers; only Glory: to the saint, if there be in the Menaion, then Both now: theotokion of the Aposticha of the Octoechos, in the tone of the Doxastikon and the day of the week.
5.	Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: Dismissal Theotokion from the Horologion, in the tone of the saint's troparion and of the day of the week[^112].
o	If two saints occur, then there will be the troparion to the first saint, Glory: to the second, Both now: Dismissal Theotokion in the tone of the second saint and of the day of the week[^73].
AT COMPLINE
1.	Canon of the Theotokos of the Octoechos, of the current tone, exactly as in the Octoechos, that is, every ode with the Heirmos on 5, without Katavasias and without Litanies, only after the 6th Ode - "Lord, have mercy" (3), also Glory, Both now: Sessional Hymn.
2.	Troparia after "It is truly meet": of the temple, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos, and also of the day of the week, and the other four that are in the Horologion in the order of Small Compline. If the temple is of a saint, then first - of the day[^196], and then - of the temple. On Wednesday and Friday, if the temple is of the Lord or of the Theotokos, there is no need to say that of the temple first, because the Cross Troparion is of the Lord[^74].
AT THE Midnight Office: Everything exactly as in the Horologion for weekdays.
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": troparion of the saint twice, Glory, Both now: Dismissal Theotokion in the tone of the saint's troparion[^121][^119] and of the day of the week[^75].
o	If two saints occur, then the troparion to the first saint twice, Glory: to the second once, Both now: Dismissal Theotokion in the tone of the second saint[^76].
2.	Kathismata current, usually two, after each of which there is a small litany and a Sessional Hymn from the Octoechos[^77].
3.	Canons 3 on 14: first of the Octoechos with the Heirmos on 6, second of the Octoechos without the Heirmos, on 4, and of the saint of the Menaion without the Heirmos, on 4. For the Heirmoi are taken only of the first canon. Katavasia only after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Ode - Heirmos of the last canon, that is, of the saint[^78]. After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the saint, after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the saint, if he has one, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion from the Octoechos, also Glory: Exaposteilarion of the saint, if he has one, Both now: Theotokion of the Exaposteilarion of the saint. If the saint does not have an Exaposteilarion, then Glory, Both now: Theotokion of the Exaposteilarion of the Octoechos. Only on Wednesday and Friday, because the Exaposteilarion of the saint does not have a Stavrotheotokion, but only a Theotokion, the Stavrotheotokion of the Exaposteilarion of the Octoechos is taken. Also on Thursday, for then the Theotokion of the Octoechos is special, relating to St. Nicholas, whose service is leading on this day, the Theotokion of the Octoechos is taken, and not of the Menaion[^79].
o	If two saints occur, then there will be the first Canon of the Octoechos (for the second is not taken) with the Heirmos on 6; also the canon of the first saint, without the Heirmos, on 4, and of the second without the Heirmos, on 4[^80]. Katavasia after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Ode - Heirmos of the second canon[^81]. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the second saint, if he has one, then Sessional Hymn of the first saint without Theotokion, Glory: Sessional Hymn of the second saint, Both now: his Theotokion[^82]. After the 6th Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the first saint, after the 9th Ode - Exaposteilarion of the Octoechos, also Exaposteilarion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, if he has one, Both now: his Theotokion[^83].
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then there will be the first Canon of the Octoechos with the Heirmos on 4, not taking two Martyria in it (except Thursday, when there are no Martyria), also the second of the Octoechos on 4 and from the Menaion of the saint on 6[^84]. Everything else in the canon is as with one saint on 4.
4.	Aposticha - all Octoechos, only if there is a Doxastikon in the Menaion to the saint, then at "Both now" the Theotokion is taken from the Matins Aposticha in the tone of the Doxastikon and of the day of the week.
5.	At the end: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: Dismissal Theotokion in the tone of the saint's troparion and of the day of the week, different from the one that was at Vespers and at "God is the Lord".
o	If two saints occur, then there will be the troparion of the first, Glory: of the second, Both now: Theotokion in the tone of the second and of the day of the week[^85].
Note about a Saint on 6
1.	Sometimes a saint on 6 has nothing more than a saint on 4, except for six troparia in the odes of the Canon of Matins and six stichera on "Lord, I have cried", if it does not coincide with the service of some feast; for then there will be on "Lord, I have cried" 3 stichera to the feast and 3 to the saint (September 9).
2.	Sometimes he has also on the Aposticha of Matins, after the stichera of the Octoechos, one sticheron with its own refrain, and in addition to that a Doxastikon (November 17).
3.	Sometimes he has Praises stichera, numbering 4, and afterwards - the Small Doxology and the Aposticha of the Octoechos, in its own place (September 6 and October 7). However, in this case, the decision remains with the Rector: to take the Great Doxology without the Aposticha, or the Small with the Aposticha[^86].
4.	Sometimes He has not only Praises stichera and the Great Doxology, but also at "Lord, I have cried" the Dogmatikon in the tone of the Doxastikon and a whole proper Aposticha, and for the troparia - the Sunday Theotokion at Vespers and at Matins. At Matins - proper Sessional Hymns and at the Canon - the designated Katavasia after every Ode (October 23 and July 25). If there be a feast of the Lord or of the Theotokos on 6, then the Canon is only of this service, without the Octoechos (July 2 and August 16 and 31).
AT THE HOURS
Troparia and Kontakia: at the 1st - of the day of the week, at the 3rd and 9th - of the saint, at the 6th - of the temple[^87].
•	If two saints occur, then the troparion and Kontakion at the 1st should be of the day of the week, at the 3rd - to the first saint, at the 6th - to the temple, at the 9th - to the second saint.
AT THE LITURGY
According to our general custom everything is taken only of the day, that is:
1.	Troparion of the day of the week, also Glory: its Kontakion, Both now: Kontakion of the temple, if of the Lord or of the Theotokos. If the temple is of a saint - then the general Theotokion "O Protection" ("O Undisputed Intercessor")[^89], or one of the feasts of the Theotokos, of the tone[^90]. On Wednesday and Friday we do not select Theotokia, but replace the Troparion of the day with the Kontakion of the day with the refrain "Glory, Both now", because this Kontakion is of the Lord.
2.	Prokimenon, Alleluia, Communion Hymn - of the day (at the end of the Apostle or our Sluzhebnik (lit. "Service Book")).
3.	Apostle and Gospel - of the day of the week, sequential after the Descent of the Holy Spirit[^91].
Notes
1.	If the service is taken only to the saint, then the Theotokion or Kontakion of the temple is taken one of the aforementioned.
2.	If the service is only for some specific need, then the Theotokion will be for the need, and where there is none, then the Troparion of the service for need is replaced by its Kontakion (with the refrain "Glory, Both now"); it does not have to be of the Lord.
3.	If the service is taken both of the day and to the saint[^115], then the service of the day precedes the saint and there will be the troparion of the day, then - of the saint and Kontakion of the day, also Glory: Kontakion of the saint, Both now: Theotokion or Kontakion of the temple, one of the aforementioned. On Wednesday and Friday: the Kontakion of the saint is replaced by the Kontakion of the day.
4.	If the service of the day or of the saint and for a need is taken, then the service of the day or of the saint precedes the service for need and there will be the troparion of the day or of the saint and for need, also Kontakion of the day or of the saint, Glory: Kontakion for need, Both now: Theotokion for need, if there be one. On Wednesday and Friday: the Kontakion for need is replaced by the Kontakion of the day; but when the need does not have a Theotokion, then there will be Glory: Kontakion of the day, Both now: Kontakion for need.
5.	The service for need, according to the decree of the Lviv Synod[^92], must always be taken alone, except for the Apostle and Gospel of the day, which may be combined with the service for the dead and precede its Apostle and Gospel.
6.	In cathedral churches, where the Divine Service is celebrated properly and daily, one should not leave out the Apostle and Gospel of the day and here it is better to read the Apostle-Gospel of the day, rather than of the saint, for the Apostle-Gospels of the saints are repeated more often during the year, but of the day - not[^93].
7.	If there be several Prokimena, Alleluias, Apostle-Gospels and Communion Hymns, then one must know how to take them. Know first, that in church typikons more than two are not given, with the exception of Apostle-Gospels, of which only in Slavonic typikons three are given, for the Slavs are richer in supplications than the Greeks. For where three readings coincide, the Greek typikons do not give the sequential one, but the Slavonic ones take it under the refrain of the first reading, as if one with it[^94]. When this is impossible, on the occasion of some great feast, then they order to take it on the day before under the refrain with the sequential one[^95]. However, this rule has been preserved among us perhaps only in cathedral churches, for in others usually only one Apostle-Gospel is taken, as also one service either of the day, or of the saint, or one for need. If, therefore, there be two Prokimena and two Alleluias, then both are taken under one heading, that is both Prokimena - before the refrain of the first reading, both Alleluias - after the completion of the second reading. However, the first Prokimenon is taken twice, namely: once - before and once - after the verse, the second - only once and without a verse, for in this case the Typikon does not give a verse. Similarly also "Alleluia": both of its verses are taken only of the first service, and of the second - only one first verse[^96]. The Heading, that is from whom: from Paul, from Matthew or from another, is taken only of the first reading, and the others usually are not taken, although it would be better to announce the headings of other readings as well, for it is not indifferent to the listeners to know the reading of which holy author is being proclaimed; and for this reason only would the rubric make certain sense, which orders to take the sequential reading under the refrain, for taking one reading under the refrain of another means merging it with the previous one because its heading is not announced. If the heading of the following third reading, which is not taken under the refrain, is not named, then it should have been said that this third reading is also taken under the refrain. "Let us be attentive" is announced only at the beginning of the first reading. If there be two Communion Hymns, then "Alleluia" is repeated only upon the completion of the second[^97].


SAINT WITHOUT POLYELEOS ON A SATURDAY
Note
In the first five days of the week the service of the Octoechos precedes the service of the Menaion; on Saturday - conversely, the service of the Menaion precedes the service of the Octoechos, for on Saturday it is general to all saints and the departed. The service of the Menaion is specific to the saint whose day it is.
AT VESPERS
1.	Kathisma current (18th), which is not taken only when it precedes an All-Night Vigil.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera: to the saint of the Menaion - 3 and of the Octoechos - 3, given in the first place[^98], Glory, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone, which is being taken leave of (Dogmatikon of the past Sunday)[^99]. After the Doxastikon, if there be one in the Menaion to the saint, the same 1st Theotokion of the tone is taken with the refrain "Both now".
o	If two saints occur, then there will be to the first saint - 3 and to the second - 3, Glory, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone. If there be a Doxastikon to the first saint, then after it is taken that same 1st Theotokion with the refrain "Both now".
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then only all 6 stichera are taken to him and the Doxastikon, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone.
3.	Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion.
4.	On the Aposticha - 3 Martyria stichera of the Octoechos with two usual refrains of the Horologion. However, because between the stichera given on the Aposticha the 2nd and 3rd (in Tone 4 and 6 - only the 3rd) are for the dead, which today we limit to Souls Saturdays, here the stichera for the dead are not taken, but instead of them, the Martyria stichera are taken from the last ones, which are on "Lord, I have cried"[^100]. If there be a Doxastikon in the Menaion to the saint, then the Theotokion is taken from the Vespers Aposticha of the Octoechos, in its tone and of the day of the week.
5.	At the end: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones, in the tone of the saint's troparion[^101].
o	If two saints occur, then there will be the troparion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones, in the tone of the second.
6.	Dismissal, by our custom, great, in view of the Apodosis of the tone, with the commemoration of the service of the day and the saint[^102].
AT COMPLINE
1.	Canon of the Theotokos from the Octoechos of the current tone[^134].
2.	After "It is truly meet": Troparion of the day, that is "Apostles and Prophets", "Martyrs", Glory: Kontakion "With the saints give rest", Both now: Kontakion "To Thee, O Lord, the Planter of creation"[^103].
Midnight Office - of Saturday
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord" - Troparion of the saint twice, Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the saint's troparion.
o	If two saints occur, then there will be the troparion of the first saint twice, Glory: of the second, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the second.
2.	Kathismata two current, after which - Small Litany and sessional hymns, of which two are Martyria and two for the dead, which, according to some editions do not have refrains, according to some they do, that is 1st Martyron - "Wondrous is God", 2nd - "Many tribulations", 1st for the dead - "Blessed are they", 2nd - "Their souls".
3.	Canons 3 on 14: of the temple, if of the Lord or of the Theotokos, with the Heirmos on 6, Heirmoi twice, Troparia on 4[^105], also to the saint, in the order of the Menaion, on 4, and the first of the Octoechos, that is the Martyria[^106] on 4. (For the second canon of the Octoechos is not taken, but is taken only on Souls Saturdays)[^107].
If the temple be of a saint, then the 1st canon will be of the sequential saint of the Menaion with the Heirmos on 6, 2nd - of the patron saint on 4, and 3rd - of the Octoechos Martyria on 4[^108]. Katavasia after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Ode - Heirmos of the last canon, that is of the Octoechos. After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the saint, after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the saint, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the saint, Glory: Exaposteilarion of the Octoechos, Both now: its Theotokion.
o	If two saints occur, then there will be the canon of the temple of the Lord or of the Theotokos on 6 and of the first saint on 4, also of the second on 4. If the temple is of a saint, then the temple is not taken and the canon of the first saint is taken on 6 and of the second on 4, also the Martyria of the Octoechos on 4. After the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Ode - Katavasia - Heirmos of the canon of the Octoechos. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the second saint, if He has one; also Sessional Hymn of the first, Glory: Sessional Hymn of the second, Both now: His Theotokion. After the 6th Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the first saint. After the 9th Ode - Exaposteilarion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: His Theotokion.
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then there will be the canon of the temple of the Lord or of the Theotokos with the Heirmos on 4, also of the saint on 6 and the first of the Octoechos on 4. If the temple is of a saint, then first there will be the canon of the saint with the Heirmos on 6, also of the patron saint on 4 and the Martyria of the Octoechos on 4[^109].
4.	Small Doxology, because a saint on 6 never has the Great.
5.	On the Aposticha: stichera of the Martyria - 3, given on the "Praises"[^110] with two usual refrains of the Horologion[^111]. Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Praises (for the one given on the Aposticha is for the dead). If there be a Doxastikon to the saint, then the Theotokion is selected to it from the Praises of the Octoechos, in the tone of the Doxastikon. The Aposticha stichera, since they are for the dead, are taken only on Souls Saturdays, for then the Praises stichera are also taken, and the stichera on the Aposticha.
6.	At the end: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: Dismissal Theotokion in the tone of the saint's troparion and of the day of the week[^112].
o	If two saints occur, then there will be the troparion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: Dismissal Theotokion (which is at the end of Matins) in the tone of the second saint.
7.	Dismissal great, with the commemoration of the service of the day and of the saint, the first and the second, if there be.
AT THE HOURS
Troparia, by our custom today: at the 1st - Troparion and Kontakion of the day, at the 3rd and 9th - of the saint, at the 6th - of the temple.
•	If two saints occur, then at the 1st and 6th so, as with one saint; at the 3rd - Troparion and Kontakion to the first saint, at the 9th - to the second[^113].
AT THE LITURGY
By our custom everything - only of the day, that is Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the day, and everything else - of the day[^114].
If you take the service of the day and to the saint, then the service to the saint precedes the service of the day, with the exception of the Apostle-Gospel, which is taken first of the day, then of the saint; and there will be the troparion to the saint and of the day, Glory: Kontakion to the saint, Both now: Kontakion of the day. Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Hymn - to the saint, then of the day. Apostle-Gospel of the day and to the saint[^115].


SAINT WITH POLYELEOS ON A SUNDAY
A Polyeleos Saint can be either on 6, or on 8[^116], although in today's Slavonic books a Polyeleos saint on 6 is rarely encountered, but on 8[^117].
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma "Blessed is the man" (according to the previous typikon - whole).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera, that is: of the Octoechos of the Sunday of the current tone - 4, also to the saint - 6, Glory: to the saint, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone (Dogmatikon).
3.	Great Prokimenon of the day "The Lord is King" and 3 readings to the saint.
4.	On the Aposticha: stichera of the Sunday Octoechos, Glory: to the saint, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday Aposticha in the tone of the Doxastikon[^118].
5.	At the end: Sunday Troparion, Glory: to the saint, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the saint's troparion[^119].
6.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of the Sunday and of the saint.
AT COMPLINE
Troparion Canon of the Octoechos of the current tone. After the Trisagion - Kontakion to the saint alone[^120].
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion of the tone twice, Glory: to the saint, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the saint's troparion[^121].
2.	Kathismata - two first current with their usual Sunday Sessional Hymns of the Octoechos, also Polyeleos with Megalynaria of the saint and "The Angelic Host", Small Litany with the exclamation "For blessed is" and Hypakoe of the tone, also 1st and 2nd Sessional Hymn of the saint once without Theotokia, Glory: 3rd Sessional Hymn of the saint, Both now: his Theotokion[^122]. (Mark in chapter 65 prescribes 1st Theotokion of the tone).
3.	Gradual of the current tone and everything else up to the canon - of the Sunday.
4.	Canons 3 on 14. If a saint on 8 is celebrated, then there will be the Sunday Canon of the Octoechos with the Heirmos on 4 and of the Theotokos on 2[^123], and of the saint on 8[^124]; if he is celebrated on 6, then there will be the Sunday Canon with the Heirmos on 4 and of the Theotokos on 4, and to the saint on 6[^125]. The Cross-Resurrection canon in both cases is not taken[^126].
Katavasia current after every Ode. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos and SESSIONAL HYMN of the saint; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos Sunday; after the 9th - Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: Exaposteilarion of the saint, Both now: Sunday Theotokion of the Exaposteilarion[^127].
5.	Praises stichera - 8: of the Sunday Octoechos of the current tone - 4 and of the saint with "Glory" - 4, with two of his refrains[^128], given on the Vespers Aposticha. Glory: Gospel sticheron sequential, Both now: "Most Blessed Art Thou".
6.	After the Great Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of the two usual ones, that is in an odd tone - "Today salvation has come to the world"; in an even tone - "Having risen from the tomb".
7.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of the Sunday service and of the saint.
AT THE HOURS
At all hours: Sunday Troparion, also Glory: to the saint, Kontakia - alternating, that is: at the 1st and 6th - Sunday, at the 3rd and 9th - to the saint[^129].
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Sunday Troparion and of the saint; also Sunday Kontakion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: Theotokion or one of the feasts of the Theotokos in the tone of the Doxastikon, or another, as we gave in the first case on page 53.
2.	Prokimenon, Apostle, Alleluia, Gospel and Communion Hymn - first of the Sunday, and after - to the saint.


SAINT WITH POLYELEOS ON WEEKDAYS AND SATURDAY
Note: The Octoechos is not used.
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma "Blessed is the man" (according to the Typikon - only the 1st antiphon).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera[^130] or 8[^131], all to the saint. Glory: to the saint, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone, in view of its Apodosis. Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion and three readings to the saint.
3.	Aposticha whole to the saint, with his refrains. To the Doxastikon of the saint the Theotokion is selected from the Sunday Aposticha in the tone of the Doxastikon[^132].
4.	At the end: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the saint's troparion[^133].
5.	Dismissal great with the commemoration only of the service of the saint, but of the day - never, because in this case the service of the Octoechos is not taken.
AT COMPLINE
Canon of the Theotokos from the Octoechos of the current tone[^134]. After "It is truly meet" with the Trisagion - Kontakion to the saint alone[^135].
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion to the saint twice, Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones, in the tone of the saint's troparion.
2.	Kathismata - two current with Sessional Hymns of the saint, also Kathisma 19, that is Polyeleos with Megalynaria and the Post-Polyeleos Sessional Hymn of the saint.
3.	Gradual of Tone 4, first antiphon.
4.	Prokimenon, Gospel and Sticheron to the saint.
o	The Typikon of the Pochaiv Anthologion, instead of "Through the prayers of the holy Apostles" gives: "Through the prayers of the saint (name), whose memory is celebrated (See the service of a prophet). So gives also the Greek-Venetian Menaion (See e. g. January 11, 25, 27, 30). However, general editions do not give this.
5.	Canons two: 1st - of the Theotokos, one of the two usual ones ("Having traversed the moisture", Tone 8 of Sunday Matins, or "Having crossed the water", Tone 8 of Compline on Tuesday) with the Heirmos on 6, then to the saint one or two canons on 8[^136].
o	On Saturday, if the temple is of the Lord or of the Theotokos, the canon of the temple is taken with the Heirmos on 6, Heirmos - twice, and to the saint on 8[^137].
Katavasia current after every Ode. After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the saint, after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the saint, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the saint.
6.	Praises stichera - 4 to the saint, Glory: his Doxastikon, Both now: Theotokion, which is after the Doxastikon of the saint.
7.	After the Great Doxology with the Trisagion - Troparion to the saint, Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the saint's troparion.
8.	Dismissal great, as at Vespers.
AT THE HOURS: At all hours: Troparion and Kontakion of the saint.
AT THE LITURGY: Everything - only to the saint. Apostle and Gospel first - of the day, then - to the saint.
SAINT WITH All-Night Vigil ON A SUNDAY
AT SMALL VESPERS
1.	On "Lord, I have cried": stichera - 4, all Sunday of the current tone of the Octoechos; also Glory: sticheron to the saint, Both now: Theotokion of the tone of Small Vespers[^138] that is 1st Theotokion of the tone[^139], which is called Dogmatikon[^140].
2.	On the Aposticha stichera - 4, that is: one Sunday, which is in the first place in the Octoechos of the current tone and 3 to the saint with two of his refrains, which are on the Aposticha of Great Vespers[^141], also Glory: to the saint from his Small Vespers, Both now: Theotokion from the Aposticha of Small Vespers[^142].
3.	At the end: Sunday Troparion, Glory: to the saint, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the saint's troparion.
4.	Dismissal with the commemoration of the Sunday and of the saint.
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma 1 "Blessed is the man" (according to the Typikon - whole, according to our custom today - only certain selected verses).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" stichera - 10, that is 4 from the Octoechos and 6 to the saint, Glory: to the saint, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone.
3.	Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion and 3 readings to the saint.
4.	On the Lytia: according to the Slavonic Typikon, first sticheron - of the temple (which today we usually do not take), also stichera to the saint. Glory: to the saint, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday Aposticha of Great Vespers, in the tone of the Doxastikon[^153][^144][^143].
5.	On the Aposticha: stichera of the Sunday tone, Glory: to the saint, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday Aposticha of Great Vespers, in the tone of the Doxastikon.
6.	At the Blessing of Loaves: Troparion "O Virgin Theotokos" twice and to the saint once[^227][^145].
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: to the saint, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the saint's troparion.
2.	Two current kathismata with their Sunday Sessional Hymns of the Octoechos; also Kathisma 19 (Polyeleos) with Megalynaria and "The Angelic Host", and Hypakoe of the tone, and immediately all three Sessional Hymns of the saint, that is 1st and 2nd without Theotokion, then Glory: 2nd Sessional Hymn, which is called the Polyeleos one, Both now: its Theotokion[^147].
3.	Gradual, Prokimenon, Gospel and Sticheron, all only Resurrection Sunday.
o	During the singing of the canon, by our custom, the Priest anoints the people with oil blessed at Vespers.
4.	Canons three or four on 14, namely: Sunday with Heirmos on 4 and of the Theotokos on 2, and to the saint on 8, there will be two or only one canon; for usually the saint has two canons[^148].
Katavasia current after every Ode. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos, and Sessional Hymn to the saint. After the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos Sunday, after the 9th - Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: to the saint, Both now: Theotokion of the Sunday Exaposteilarion
Everything else at Matins, at the Hours and at the Liturgy so, as with a Polyeleos saint, here on page 73.

SAINT WITH All-Night Vigil ON WEEKDAYS AND ON SATURDAY
AT SMALL VESPERS
1.	On "Lord, I have cried" and on the Aposticha all stichera - to the saint, on the Aposticha there will be separate refrains to the saint. Only regarding the Theotokia on "Lord, I have cried" and on the Aposticha let it be known, that they sometimes will be special[^150], sometimes only general, designated only by the first words; sometimes even without indication of the first words. And in this last case, we think that they should be selected from the Octoechos on Daily Vespers in the tone of the Doxastikon and of the day of the week, which are given at the end of every volume of the Menaion and of the Lviv Anthologion; if - not, then in the tone of one of the three Doxastika, given at the end of the Pochaiv Anthologion[^151].
2.	At the end: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the saint's troparion.
AT Great Vespers
1.	"Blessed is the man" (according to the Typikon - only the 1st antiphon).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried": stichera of the saint on 8, Glory: His Doxastikon, Both now: 1st Theotokion (Dogmatikon), in the tone of the Doxastikon; on Friday for Saturday - Dogmatikon of the current tone[^152], in view of the Apodosis of the tone.
3.	Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion and 3 readings to the saint.
4.	On the Lytia: first sticheron - of the temple, which today we usually do not take, all the rest - to the saint and Glory: to the saint, Both now: Theotokion or special, if there be, or general from the Aposticha of Sunday Great Vespers, in the tone of the Doxastikon[^153].
5.	On the Aposticha all stichera - to the saint, with his two refrains; Theotokion to the Doxastikon, if there be no special one, is taken from the Sunday Aposticha in the tone of the Doxastikon[^154].
6.	At the Blessing of Loaves: Troparion of the saint twice and "O Virgin Theotokos" once.
AT Great Matins, AT THE HOURS AND AT THE LITURGY
Everything so, as in the case of a Polyeleos saint without All-Night (see page 75-76); only Matins begins from "Glory to the Holy", and there will be anointing with oil during the canon, according to custom.
Note
Three feasts, namely: The Nativity and Beheading of St. John the Baptist on June 24 and August 29 and of the Chief Apostles Peter and Paul on June 29 surpass other saints with All-Night Vigil in that at Matins their canons are taken alone, without the Theotokion canon, and at the Liturgy their Apostle-Gospels are taken alone[^155], without the daily ones, which are read on the previous day under the refrain, except for Sundays, for these always precede. According to today's general custom, except for cathedral churches, on other saints too the daily Apostle-Gospels are not read. To these three feasts the Moscow Typikon adds also the feast of John the Theologian and the Patronal Feast[^156].
CASES OF FEASTS
Forefeast with a Saint without Polyeleos on a Sunday
Note: If two saints with a Forefeast fall on a Sunday, then the service of the first (second) is transferred to another day, according to the decision of the Ecclesiarch[^157].
AT Great Vespers
1.	"Blessed is the man" (according to the Typikon - all three antiphons).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera, that is: of the Octoechos of the current tone - 4, of the Forefeast - 3 and to the saint - 3. Glory: of the Forefeast, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone. If there be a Doxastikon to the saint, then having discarded the Doxastikon of the Forefeast, Glory: Doxastikon to the saint is taken, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone[^158].
o	If the saint be on 6, then there will be of the Sunday - 3, of the Forefeast - 3 and to the saint - 4, Glory: to the saint, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone[^159].
3.	On the Aposticha: stichera Sunday, Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast. If there be a Doxastikon to the saint, then after it at "Both now" is taken of the Forefeast.
4.	At the end: Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the Forefeast.
5.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of the Sunday service and of the saint[^160].
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Forefeast alone[^161].
AT THE Midnight Office: Trinitarian Canon of the current tone and everything else, as usual.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: to the saint, Both now: of the Forefeast.
2.	Everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual.
3.	Canons 4 on 14, that is: first - Sunday of the Octoechos with Heirmos on 4 and second - of the Octoechos of the Theotokos on 2, also of the Forefeast on 4 and of the saint on 4[^162]. (If the saint - on 6, then here is taken only on 4). Katavasia after every Ode - current. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the Forefeast and of the saint, Glory: Sessional Hymn of the saint, Both now: of the Forefeast. After the 6th Ode - Kontakion-Ikos Sunday. After the 9th - "Holy is the Lord our God" thrice and Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the Forefeast[^163].
4.	Praises stichera - 8, that is: of the Octoechos - 4 and to the saint - 4, if He has, with two separate refrains of His; if the saint does not have, then of the feast on 4 (from the Aposticha with their refrains); also Glory: sticheron of the feast, Both now: "Most Blessed Art Thou"[^164].
5.	After the Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of two usual ones.
6.	Dismissal great, as at Vespers.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Sunday Troparion, also Glory: at the 1st and 3rd - also of the Forefeast, at the 6th and 9th - also to the saint. Kontakion, Sunday and of the feast, we refuse alternatingly, that is at the 1st and at the 6th - of the Forefeast, and at the 3rd and 9th - Sunday[^165].
AT THE LITURGY
All service - only of the Sunday, except Troparia, for they are taken also of the Forefeast with the Sunday ones, that is Sunday and of the Forefeast, Glory: Sunday Kontakion, Both now: of the Forefeast[^166].


FOREFEAST WITH A SAINT WITHOUT POLYELEOS ON WEEKDAYS AND ON SATURDAY
Notes
1.	Beginning from the very Forefeast until the Apodosis of the feast, the service of the Octoechos, with the exception of Sunday, is not taken and, instead of it, the service of the feast is taken in the first place, likewise also on Saturday; it is combined together with the service of the current saint, except for the Apodosis, for then the service of the saint is transferred to another day. Only at Compline is the Canon of the Theotokos of the Octoechos taken.
2.	The Divine Service is celebrated in a lesser form, that is Vespers and Matins - daily.
3.	The sequence of stichera and troparia does not end with usual Octoechos Theotokia, but festal ones; with the exception of Friday evening for Saturday, in view of the Apodosis of the tone, usually the 1st Theotokion of the tone is taken.
AT VESPERS
1.	Kathisma current.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera, that is: of the Forefeast - 3 and to the saint - 3, Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast, or Glory: to the saint, if He has, Both now: of the Forefeast.
o	If two saints occur, then there will be to the first - 3, to the second - 3, also Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast. Stichera of the Forefeast then are none[^167].
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then also there will be stichera of the Forefeast - 3 and to the saint - 3, as with a saint on 4[^168].
On Friday evening for Saturday: Dogmatikon of the tone, which is being taken leave of.
3.	On the Aposticha: stichera of the Forefeast; if Glory be to the saint, then Both now: of the Forefeast.
4.	At the end: Troparion to the saint, Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast.
o	If two saints occur, then first the troparion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: of the Forefeast.
5.	Dismissal medium with the commemoration of the service of the day and of the saint[^169].
AT COMPLINE
Canon of the Theotokos of the current week in the Octoechos. After "It is truly meet" with the Trisagion - Kontakion of the Forefeast alone[^170].
AT THE Midnight Office: Everything exactly so, as in the Horologion, to the saint - nothing.
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the Forefeast twice, Glory: to the saint, Both now: of the Forefeast.
o	If two saints occur, then there will be the Troparion of the Forefeast once, also to the first saint once, Glory: to the second once, Both now: of the Forefeast[^171].
2.	Kathismata two current with Sessional Hymns of the Forefeast.
3.	Canons 2 on 12, that is: of the Forefeast with Heirmos on 8 and of the saint on 4[^172]. Katavasia after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Ode - Heirmos of the last canon, that is of the saint[^173]. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos and Sessional Hymn of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast, after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the Forefeast, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the saint, if the saint has one, if - not, then only of the Forefeast (December 29, January 2), Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast[^174].
o	If two saints occur, then there will be 3 canons on 14, that is: of the Forefeast with Heirmos on 6, also of the first saint on 4[^175] and of the second on 4. Katavasia - after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Ode - Heirmos of the last canon, that is of the second saint[^176]. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the first and second saint[^177], also Sessional Hymn of the first, Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the Forefeast; after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, if he has, Both now: of the Forefeast (e. g. November 2).
o	If the saint be on 6, then the Canon of the Forefeast on 6 and to the saint on 6 (December 20)[^178].
4.	On the Aposticha: stichera of the Forefeast, Glory: to the saint, if he has, Both now: of the Forefeast, if - not, then Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast.
5.	At the end: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast.
o	If there be two saints, then the troparion of the first, Glory: of the second, Both now: of the Forefeast.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Troparion of the Forefeast, also at the 3rd and 9th also Glory: to the saint, Kontakia - alternating, that is: at the 1st and 6th - of the Forefeast, at the 3rd and 9th - to the saint.
•	If there be two saints, then at the 3rd after Glory - Troparion to the first saint, and at the 9th - to the second; Kontakia: at the 3rd - to the first, at the 9th - to the second saint[^179].
AT THE LITURGY
By our custom today: Troparion, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the Forefeast, everything else - of the day[^180].
FEAST OF THE LORD ON A SUNDAY AND ON WEEKDAYS
All service - only of the feast, of the great type with All-Night Vigil.
AT SMALL VESPERS
On "Lord, I have cried": stichera of the feast on 4 and Aposticha of the feast with two refrains of the feast, and At the end - Troparion of the feast one.
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathismata usually none; only on Saturday for Sunday - Kathisma "Blessed is the man", according to the Typikon - all three antiphons; on Sunday for Monday - only the first antiphon.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried": stichera of the feast on 8.
3.	Prokimenon of the day; only, if the feast falls on a Saturday, then, instead of the daily Prokimenon, the Great Prokimenon of the feast is taken, given on Vespers of the next day. In this case, Vespers of the next day will be on Saturday for Sunday, which has the Great Prokimenon "The Lord is King", which does not yield to the Prokimenon of the feast. This Vespers, therefore, is already not of the feast itself, but of the Afterfeast and therefore it cannot exclude the Sunday service, which occupies the first place. In order not to discard the Prokimenon of the feast, it is taken before that on Great Vespers of the feast itself, namely on Friday[^181].
4.	Three readings of the feast.
5.	On the Lytia and on the Aposticha - stichera of the feast.
6.	At the Blessing of Loaves - Troparion of the feast thrice.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the feast twice, Glory, Both now: once more.
2.	Kathismata two current with Sessional Hymns of the feast, also Kathisma 19 (Polyeleos) and Megalynaria, and the Post-Polyeleos Sessional Hymn of the feast.
3.	Gradual of Tone 4, 1st antiphon. Prokimenon, Gospel and Sticheron of the feast.
4.	Canons one or two. Troparia on 12, Heirmoi - twice. Katavasia current after every Ode. After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn, after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the feast. At the 9th Ode "More honorable" is not sung, but festal refrains to the Heirmoi and Troparia of the canon.
5.	Praises stichera of the feast - 4, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
6.	After the Great Doxology - Troparion of the feast.
7.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of the feast.
AT THE HOURS: At all hours - Troparion and Kontakion of the feast. Dismissal with the commemoration of the feast.
AT THE LITURGY
Antiphons, Entrance and everything else - to the feast[^182]. Instead of the Trisagion, on the Exaltation of the Holy Cross and on the Sunday of the Adoration of the Cross we sing "Before Thy Cross"; on the Nativity of Christ, on Theophany, on Lazarus Saturday, on Great Saturday, during Bright Week and on Pentecost Sunday is sung "As many as have been baptized into Christ"[^183]. Instead of "It is truly meet", according to our later Typikon, is taken the Heirmos of the 9th Ode of the Festal Canon with the festal refrain.


FEAST OF THE THEOTOKOS ON A SUNDAY
The service of the feast is combined with the Sunday Octoechos, which takes the first place.
AT SMALL VESPERS
1.	On "Lord, I have cried": 4 Sunday stichera of the current tone, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
2.	On the Aposticha: one Sunday sticheron of the current tone, which is in the first place, also 3 stichera of the feast from the Aposticha of Great Vespers with their refrains[^184]; Glory, Both now: of the feast, from Small Vespers[^185].
3.	At the end: Sunday Troparion; Glory, Both now: of the feast.
4.	Dismissal small with the commemoration Sunday and festal.
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma 1 ("Blessed is the man"), according to the Typikon - all three antiphons, by our custom today - only selected verses.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera, namely: of the Sunday Octoechos - 4, which is in the first place, also of the feast - 6, Glory, Both now: of the feast[^186].
3.	Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion.
4.	Three readings of the feast.
5.	On the Lytia all stichera - of the feast.
6.	On the Aposticha: stichera Sunday, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
7.	At the Blessing of Loaves: Troparion of the feast thrice.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
2.	Kathismata two current with Sunday Sessional Hymns and with their Theotokia, also Polyeleos with Megalynaria, "The Angelic Host" and Hypakoe of the tone. All three Sessional Hymns of the feast, that is: 1st Sessional Hymn once, 2nd Sessional Hymn once, then Glory, Both now: 3rd Sessional Hymn, if it is double, then there will be Glory: first, Both now: second[^187].
3.	Gradual of the current tone, afterwards - "Resurrection of Christ"; everything else up to the canon - to the feast[^188].
4.	Canons 3 on 14, that is: Sunday from the Octoechos, with Heirmos on 4, Theotokion from the Octoechos, without Heirmos, on 2 and both canons of the feast, without Heirmos, on 8; if to the saint there be only one, then one is taken on 8[^189]. Katavasia current after every Ode. After the 3rd Ode - Sunday Kontakion-Ikos and Sessional Hymn of the feast (on the Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos, instead of the Sessional Hymn, - Hypakoe of the feast); after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the feast, after the 9th - Sunday Exaposteilarion sequential, one of 11, then Glory, Both now: of the feast. At the 9th Ode - "More honorable", festal refrains, according to the Typikon, are not taken; however, we think, that it would be better to coordinate the festal refrains with the troparion of the canon of the feast, than with the general refrain "Most Holy Theotokos, save us"[^190].
5.	Praises stichera - 8, that is: 4 Sunday and 4 of the feast with two festal refrains; Glory: of the feast, Both now: "Most Blessed Art Thou".
6.	After the Great Doxology with the Trisagion - Sunday Troparion, one of two usual ones.
7.	Dismissal great with the commemoration Sunday and of the feast.
8.	Glory, Both now: Gospel Sticheron.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Sunday Troparion, Glory, Both now: of the feast. Kontakia - alternating, that is at the 1st and 6th - Sunday, at the 3rd and 9th - of the feast[^191].
AT THE LITURGY
Antiphons Sunday. On "Come, let us worship", if you wish, to "Save us, O Son of God" add the refrain: "Through the prayers of the Theotokos, who sing to Thee, Alleluia"[^192]. Sunday Troparion and of the feast, Glory: Sunday Kontakion, Both now: Kontakion of the feast. Trisagion, Prokimenon, Apostle, Alleluia, Gospel and Communion Hymn - first of the Sunday, afterwards - of the feast. Instead of "It is truly meet", according to our later Slavonic custom, we sing the Heirmos of the 9th Ode of the festal canon (with its refrain)[^193].
________________________________________
FEAST OF THE THEOTOKOS ON WEEKDAYS
Everything - according to the Typikon of a Feast of the Lord (see page 87-89), except for the Antiphons, which will be daily, and the Entrance, which will be "Come, let us worship", and the Trisagion, which always is on Theotokion feasts.

Note about the Afterfeast
Everything is performed according to the Typikon of the Forefeast, given here before on page 81-83. However, in the Afterfeast there will be:
1.	Troparion and Kontakion of the feast itself.
2.	At the Dismissal is commemorated also the service of the feast.
3.	At the Liturgy, in the Afterfeast of the Lord, first two antiphons - of the feast[^194], third - usual with the refrain of the feast, also and the usual Entrance "Come, let us worship" with the same refrain of the feast[^195].
4.	Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Hymn on Sunday - of the day (that is of the Sunday) and of the feast, on weekdays - only of the feast; Apostle and Gospel - of the day[^196]. When on Sunday the service of a saint is also taken, then the Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Hymn of the feast are discarded, and only of the Sunday and of the saint are taken. On weekdays, if the service of a saint is combined with the festal service, then all this is taken in the first place - to the saint, afterwards - to the saint. But because among us to a saint without Polyeleos at the Liturgy usually nothing is taken, all this is taken only to the feast.
5.	Instead of "It is truly meet" - Heirmos of the 9th Ode of the canon of the feast. However, we will present separate and full models.
________________________________________
AFTERFEAST WITH A SAINT WITHOUT POLYELEOS ON A SUNDAY
Note: If two saints fall on a Sunday, then the service of the second saint is transferred to another day, according to the decision of the Ecclesiarch.
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma usual "Blessed is the man" (according to the Typikon - all three antiphons).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera, that is: 4 from the Octoechos of the current tone, 3 of the Afterfeast and 3 to the saint, Glory: of the Afterfeast, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone. If there be a Doxastikon to the saint, then, having discarded the Doxastikon of the feast, the Doxastikon to Him is taken, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone.
o	If the saint falls on 6, then there will be stichera of the Sunday - 3, of the Afterfeast - 3 and to the saint - 4, Glory: to the saint, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone.
3.	On the Aposticha: Sunday stichera of the Octoechos, Glory, Both now: of the Afterfeast.
4.	At the end: Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the Afterfeast.
5.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of Sunday and of the saint[^197].
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" with the Trisagion - Hypakoe of the tone, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the feast.
AT THE Midnight Office: Trinitarian Canon of the Octoechos of the current tone and other things, as usual.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: to the saint, Both now: of the feast; everything else up to the Sunday Canon - as usual.
2.	Canons 4 on 14: Sunday Octoechos with Heirmos on 4, of the Theotokos Octoechos on 2, of the feast on 4 and of the saint on 4.
o	If the saint be on 6, then also - on 4. Katavasia after every Ode - current. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the feast and of the saint, Glory: Sessional Hymn of the saint, Both now: of the feast. After the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos Sunday, after the 9th - "More honorable", after the 9th - "Holy is the Lord our God", Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the feast.
3.	Praises stichera - 8, that is: 4 Sunday from the Octoechos and 4 of the feast with two of its refrains. Glory: Gospel Sticheron, Both now: "Most Blessed Art Thou".
o	If the saint has Praises stichera, then stichera of the feast are not taken and, instead of them, 4 stichera are taken to the saint with two of His refrains, that is: 3 prosomia and one idiomelon, which is on Glory[^198], then Glory: Gospel Sticheron, Both now: "Most Blessed Art Thou".
4.	After the Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of two usual ones.
5.	Dismissal great, as at Vespers.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Sunday Troparion, also Glory: at the 1st and 6th - also of the feast, at the 3rd and 9th - also to the saint. Kontakion, only Sunday and of the feast, we refuse alternatingly, that is: at the 1st and 6th - of the feast, at the 3rd and 9th - Sunday[^199].
AT THE LITURGY
Antiphons, in the Afterfeast of a feast of the Lord, we take: two first - of the feast, third - usual with the refrain of the feast, also "Come"[^200]. In the Afterfeast of the Theotokos - Antiphons usual on all Sundays. Sunday Troparion and of the feast, Glory: Sunday Kontakion, Both now: of the feast and the Trisagion[^201]. Prokimenon, Apostle, Alleluia, Gospel and Communion Hymn - only Sunday[^202].

AFTERFEAST WITH A SAINT WITHOUT POLYELEOS ON WEEKDAYS AND ON SATURDAY
AT VESPERS
1.	Kathisma current.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera, that is: 3 of the feast and 3 to the saint, Glory, Both now: to the feast, or Glory: to the saint, if He has, Both now: of the feast.
o	If two saints occur, then there will be to the first - 3 and to the second - 3, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then the stichera to him will be only 3[^203], as also to the saint on 4.
On Friday evening for Saturday - 1st Theotokion of the tone, which is being taken leave of (Dogmatikon)[^204].
3.	On the Aposticha: stichera of the feast, Glory: to the saint, if there be, Both now: of the feast, if - not, then Glory, Both now: of the feast.
4.	At the end: Troparion to the saint, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
o	If two saints occur, then the troparion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: of the feast.
5.	Dismissal medium with the commemoration of the feast and of the saint, without commemoration of the service of the weekday, because it is not taken.
AT COMPLINE
Canon of the Most Holy Theotokos, according to the sequence of the Octoechos. After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the feast alone.
AT THE Midnight Office: Everything exactly so, as in the Horologion.
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the feast twice, Glory: to the saint, Both now: of the feast.
o	If two saints occur, then the troparion of the feast once and of the first saint once, Glory: of the second, Both now: again of the feast.
2.	Kathismata two current with Sessional Hymns of the feast.
3.	Canons 2 on 12, that is: of the feast with Heirmos on 8 and of the saint on 4. Katavasia after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Ode - Heirmos of the last canon, that is of the saint. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos and Sessional Hymn of the saint; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the feast; after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the saint twice, Glory, Both now: of the feast[^205].
o	If two saints occur, then 3 canons on 14, that is: Canon of the feast with Heirmos on 6, to the first saint on 4 and to the second on 4. Katavasia after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Ode - Heirmos of the last canon, that is of the second saint. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the first and of the second saint, also Sessional Hymn of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: of the feast; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the feast; after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: of the feast.
o	If a saint on 6 occurs, then the Canon of the feast with Heirmos on 6 and to the saint on 6[^206], everything else, as above with one saint.
4.	On the Aposticha: stichera of the feast, Glory: to the saint, if there be, Both now: of the feast, if - not, then Glory, Both now: of the feast.
o	If the saint on 6 will have Praises stichera with the Small Doxology, then they are taken on 4 and Glory: his, and Both now: of the feast. After the Litany "Let us complete" will be on the Aposticha stichera of the feast, Glory: to the saint, Both now: of the feast[^207]. If this saint will have also the Great Doxology, then the Praises stichera are taken: of the feast - 3 and to the saint - 3, Glory: to the saint, and Both now: of the feast. And after the Doxology with the Trisagion - his Troparion, Glory, Both now: of the feast, and everything else, as at Great Matins.
5.	At the end: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
o	If there be two saints, then the troparion of the first saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: of the feast.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Troparion of the feast, Glory: at the 3rd and 9th - also to the saint. Kontakia - alternating, that is: at the 1st and 6th - of the feast, at the 3rd and 9th - to the saint.
•	If two saints, then Glory: at the 3rd - to the first, and at the 9th - to the second saint. Kontakia: at the 3rd - to the first, at the 9th - to the second saint[^208].
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Antiphons in the Afterfeast of the Lord we take: two first - from the feast itself, third - general with the refrain of the feast, also and "Come, let us worship"; in the Afterfeast of the Theotokos antiphons so, as also on all days.
2.	At the Entrance - Troparion, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the feast, Trisagion.
3.	Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Hymn - of the feast, Apostle and Gospel - of the day. Instead of "It is truly meet" - Heirmos of the 9th Ode of the Canon of the feast with its refrain. Dismissal with the commemoration of the feast and of the saint[^209].


AFTERFEAST WITH A SAINT WITH POLYELEOS ON A SUNDAY
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma 1-a "Blessed is the man" (according to the Typikon - whole).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera, that is: 3 Sunday from the Octoechos, 3 of the feast and 4 to the saint, Glory: to the saint, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone (Dogmatikon)[^210].
3.	Prokimenon of the day "The Lord is King" and 3 readings to the saint.
4.	On the Aposticha: Sunday stichera of the Octoechos, Glory: to the saint, Both now: of the feast.
5.	At the end: Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the feast.
6.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of Sunday and of the saint[^211].
AT COMPLINE
1.	Canon of the Theotokos from the Octoechos of the current tone.
2.	After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the saint, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the feast[^212].
AT THE Midnight Office
Trinitarian Canon from the Octoechos of the current tone; everything else, as usually in the Horologion.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the feast.
2.	Kathismata two current with their Sunday Sessional Hymns, also Polyeleos with Megalynaria and "The Angelic Host". After the Small Litany - Hypakoe of the tone and all three Sessional Hymns of the saint without their Theotokia, that is 1st and 2nd, also Glory: 3rd, Both now: of the feast. Everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual.
3.	Canons 3 on 14, that is Sunday with Heirmos on 4, of the feast on 4 and to the saint on 6; Katavasia designated after every Ode, after the 3rd - Kontakion-Ikos of the feast and of the saint, also Sessional Hymn of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the feast, after the 6th - Sunday Kontakion-Ikos; after the 9th - Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the feast. On the 9th - "More honorable" (with the exception of Sundays in the middle of the Feast of the Resurrection, for then we sing the Heirmos of the Festal Canon)[^213].
4.	Praises stichera - 8, that is: 4 Sunday and 4 to the saint, with two refrains, given on Vespers, Glory: Gospel Sticheron, Both now: "Most Blessed Art Thou".
5.	After the Great Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of two usual ones.
6.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of Sunday and of the saint.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Sunday Troparion, also Glory: at the 1st and 6th - of the feast, at the 3rd and 9th - to the saint[^214]. After the Trisagion - Sunday Kontakion, of the feast and of the saint alternating[^215], that is: at the 1st and 9th - Sunday, at the 3rd - of the feast, at the 6th - to the saint.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Antiphons in the Afterfeast of the Lord will be: two first - of the feast, third - general with the refrain of the feast, also and "Come, let us worship".
2.	At the Entrance - Sunday Troparion, of the feast and of the saint; also Sunday Kontakion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the feast. Prokimenon, Apostle, Alleluia and Gospel - of Sunday and to the saint[^216].

AFTERFEAST WITH A SAINT WITH POLYELEOS ON WEEKDAYS[^217]
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma 1-a ("Blessed is the man", according to the Typikon - 1st antiphon).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 8 stichera[^218], that is: of the feast - 3 and to the saint - 5, Glory: to the saint, Both now: to the feast. On Friday evening - Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone (Dogmatikon).
3.	Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion.
4.	Three readings to the saint.
5.	Aposticha whole - to the saint with his refrains, only Both now: of the feast.
6.	At the end: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
7.	Dismissal with the commemoration of the feast and of the saint.
AT COMPLINE
1.	Canon of the Theotokos from the Octoechos of the current tone.
2.	After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the feast one[^219].
AT THE Midnight Office: Everything, as usual.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the feast twice, Glory: to the saint, Both now: once more of the feast.
2.	Kathismata two current with Sessional Hymns of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the feast. Sometimes these two Sessional Hymns will be only of the feast (January 11 and May 9)[^220]; third Kathisma, Polyeleos with Megalynaria, also Sessional Hymn of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
3.	Gradual of the 4th tone, 1st antiphon. Everything else up to the canon - to the saint.
4.	Canons 2 or 3 on 14, that is: of the feast with Heirmos on 6, also two or one canon to the saint on 8[^221]. Katavasia current after every Ode. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the feast and Sessional Hymn of the saint twice, Glory, Both now: Sessional Hymn of the feast; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the saint, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the saint twice, Glory, Both now: Exaposteilarion of the feast.
5.	Praises stichera sometimes - 4, all to the saint[^222], sometimes - 6, that is: 3 of the feast and 3 to the saint, Glory: to the saint, Both now: of the feast.
6.	After the Great Doxology - Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
7.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of the feast and of the saint.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Troparion of the feast, Glory: to the saint; Kontakia - alternating, that is at the 1st and 6th - of the feast, at the 3rd and 9th - to the saint[^224].
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Antiphons in the Afterfeast of the Lord will be: two first - of the feast, third - general with the refrain of the feast, also and "Come". In the Afterfeast of the Theotokos - antiphons daily "It is good".
2.	At the Entrance - Troparion of the feast and of the saint, Glory: Kontakion of the saint, Both now: Kontakion of the feast.
3.	Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Hymn - of the feast and to the saint; Apostle and Gospel - of the day and to the saint[^225]. Instead of "It is truly meet" - Heirmos of the feast.

AFTERFEAST WITH A SAINT WITH All-Night Vigil ON A SUNDAY
AT SMALL VESPERS
Everything as without the Afterfeast with a saint with All-Night Vigil on a Sunday; that is to the saint - nothing[^226].
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma, stichera on "Lord, I have cried" and on the Aposticha so, as also with a Polyeleos saint in the Afterfeast on a Sunday, as here above.
2.	On the Lytia: stichera to the saint, Glory, Both now: to the feast.
3.	At the Blessing of Loaves: Troparion "O Virgin Theotokos" twice and to the saint once[^227].
AT Great Matins, AT THE HOURS AND AT THE LITURGY
Everything according to the Typikon of a Polyeleos saint, as above on page 100-102.
AFTERFEAST WITH A SAINT WITH All-Night Vigil ON WEEKDAYS
AT SMALL VESPERS
On "Lord, I have cried" and on the Aposticha - everything to the saint, only Both now: of the feast; also at the end - Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
AT Great Vespers
Everything according to the Typikon of a Polyeleos saint with the Afterfeast on weekdays, as here above (page 102), only on the Lytia and on the Aposticha there will be stichera of the saint, Glory: his, Both now: of the feast. At the Blessing of Loaves: Troparion of the saint twice and "O Virgin Theotokos" once.
AT Great Matins, AT THE HOURS AND AT THE LITURGY
Everything according to the general Typikon of a Polyeleos saint with the Afterfeast on weekdays, as here above (page 103-104).
APODOSIS (APODOSIS) OF A FEAST ON A SUNDAY
Notes
1.	The service of the current saint, which falls on the Apodosis of the feast, is transferred to the immediately preceding[^228] or following day[^229], sometimes also to another day, if it will not be occupied by two saints or one with a Polyeleos; sometimes it is limited to the canon at Compline after the Canon of the Theotokos.
2.	The service of the feast on the Apodosis, from Vespers to the Canon of Matins has only the daily form, from the Canon to the end of Matins - the great form. If the Apodosis falls on a Sunday, then Vespers and Matins are great, in view of the Sunday service.
AT Great Vespers
1.	Kathisma "Blessed is the man".
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera, that is: 4 Sunday from the Octoechos and 6 of the feast, Glory: of the feast, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone (Dogmatikon).
3.	Prokimenon of the day "The Lord is King".
4.	Aposticha Sunday, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
5.	At the end: Sunday Troparion of the tone, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
6.	Dismissal great with the commemoration Sunday and of the saint, whose day it is[^230].
AT COMPLINE
Canon of the Theotokos, which is of the sequence of the Octoechos. After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the feast one[^231].
AT THE Midnight Office
Trinitarian Canon of the Octoechos, as usual. On the Apodosis of Mid-Pentecost and of the Resurrection, after the 1st Trisagion, - Troparion of the feast, after the 2nd - Kontakion of the feast; prayers "Remember" we do not say.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
2.	Everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual.
3.	Canons 3 or 4 on 14, that is: first - from the Octoechos Sunday with Heirmos on 4, second - from the Octoechos of the Theotokos on 2 and of the feast - one or two on 8. Katavasia current after every Ode. After the 3rd - Kontakion-Ikos and Sessional Hymn of the feast; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos Sunday[^232]; at the 9th - "More honorable" with refrains of the feast to the troparion of the canon of the feast; at the 9th - Sunday Exaposteilarion current; Glory, Both now: of the feast.
4.	Praises stichera - 8, that is: 4 Sunday of the Octoechos and 4 of the feast with "Glory"[^233] and with two refrains of the feast; Glory: Gospel Sticheron, Both now: "Most Blessed Art Thou".
5.	After the Great Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of two usual ones.
6.	Dismissal great with commemoration, as at Vespers.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the feast; Kontakia - alternating, that is at the 1st and 6th - Sunday, at the 3rd and 9th - of the feast[^234].
AT THE LITURGY
1.	First two Antiphons, if the feast is of the Lord - of the feast, third - usual with the refrain of the feast; also and "Come, let us worship". If the feast is of the Theotokos, antiphons - Sunday, as here usual, on all Sundays; sometimes "It is good" with the Sunday refrain.
2.	At the Entrance - Sunday Troparion and of the feast, Glory: Sunday Kontakion, Both now: of the feast[^235].
3.	Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Hymn of the Sunday and of the feast. Apostle and Gospel on the Apodosis of the Lord - only Sunday[^236], on the Apodosis of the Theotokos - first of the Sunday, and then - of the feast[^237].
APODOSIS (APODOSIS) OF A FEAST ON WEEKDAYS
AT VESPERS
1.	Kathisma current.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera: all - to the feast; Glory, Both now: of the feast.
On Friday evening - Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone, which is being taken leave of (Dogmatikon)[^238], except for the Apodosis of the Nativity, Theophany and Pentecost, when "Glory, Both now" will be of the feast[^239].
3.	No Entrance, nor readings; Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion.
4.	Aposticha whole - of the feast, from Great Vespers.
5.	At the end: Troparion of the feast one.
6.	Dismissal medium with the commemoration of the feast and of the saint of the day[^240].
AT COMPLINE
1.	Canon of the Theotokos - current of the Octoechos.
2.	After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the feast one.
AT THE Midnight Office
Everything exactly so, as in the Horologion; only on the Apodosis of Mid-Pentecost and of the Resurrection: after the 1st Trisagion there will be the Troparion of the feast, after the 2nd - Kontakion of the feast, without prayers "Remember".
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the feast twice, Glory, Both now: again once.
2.	Kathismata two current with Sessional Hymns of the feast and immediately Psalm 50 and Canon.
3.	Canon and everything else until the end of Matins - exactly so, as on the feast itself. Therefore at the 9th Ode there will be no "More honorable", but refrains of the feast.
4.	Dismissal great with the commemoration of the feast and of the saint.
AT THE HOURS: At all: Troparion and Kontakion only of the feast, as on the feast itself.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Two first Antiphons on the Apodosis of the Lord - of the feast, third - usual with the refrain of the feast, also and "Come, let us worship" (on the Apodosis of the Theotokos antiphons - daily)
2.	At the Entrance - Troparion, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the feast and Trisagion. Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Hymn - of the feast.
3.	Apostle and Gospel on the Apodosis of a feast of the Lord - only of the day, on the Apodosis of a feast of the Theotokos - first of the day, and then - of the feast. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- [^46]: Pochaiv Octoechos 1800, tone 1, fol. 2; and Greek, and Venetian; Moscow typikons, Tserkovne Oko (lit. "Eye of the Church") in chapter 2 and following.
[^47]: Pochaiv Octoechos at the end, fol. 7, on the verso.
[^48]: Mark, chapter 80 in the Greek Typikon, in Tserkovne Oko Mark, chapter 2, Tserkovne Oko, chapter 2 and Moscow Typikon, chapter 5.
[^49]: Μαρκ. Καιφ, οη /Mark, chapter 78/; Tserkovne Oko, chapter 2; Moscow Typikon, chapter 5.
[^50]: Peremyshl Typikon, page 8. -- The Moscow Typikon does not prescribe taking the troparion of the second saint, "for, -- it states, -- at Vespers 4 troparia are not refused", chapter 52, fol. 385 on the verso. However, that same Typikon, as also the Menaion, for the feast of St. John the Theologian on May 8, when it falls on a Sunday of the Holy Fathers, prescribes taking 4 troparia at "God is the Lord", so we do not know why it would not be possible to take 4 at Vespers as well.
[^51]: Lviv Synod; Tserkovne Oko also mentions the saint, but the Stratyn Sluzhebnik of Balaban mentions only the saint with a Doxology.
[^52]: Horologions and Greek Octoechoi do not give a Canon to the Theotokos at Compline; however, the Greek Typikon states, saying: Παρελαβομεν δε και κατ εκαστην εν τοις Αποδειπνοις ψαλλειν Κανόνας Παρακλητικούς της Υπεραγιας Θεοτόκου. (Καιφ. ι) /And we have received [the tradition] to sing daily at Compline the Paraklesis Canons of the Most Holy Theotokos (chapter 10)/. These canons are not found in ordinary Greek Octoechoi, only at the end in them are given two theotokia canons.
[^53]: Our Horologions in the order of Small Compline and Pochaiv Octoechos in Tone 1; Moscow Octoechos gives a Kontakion (in Tone 5, at Compline). Greek Horologions give only the troparion of the saint, whose day it is, or (it must be understood, if the saint has no troparion) troparia: "(Thy Church, O Lord), throughout all the world", Glory: "With the saints give rest", Both now: "Through the intercessions of all the saints", which are found also in our Horologions for use on weekdays.
[^54]: Our Horologions at the end of Matins; Horologions of others do not have "Glory to Thee, O Christ God", but "Glory, Both now", "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Bless".
[^55]: Moscow Typikon in chapter 52 and Peremyshl, page 80.
[^56]: These Sessional Hymns, whether there be one or two (in different editions), end with their own theotokion. And when there is one, then "Glory, Both now" is sung to its theotokion together; when two, then to the second is sung "Glory", and to the theotokion -- "Both now", as is given in the Lviv editions of 1765 and 1897 and in the Greek-Venetian of 1885; but according to general editions, to the second is sung one of the two Sunday verses, given with the two Praises stichera, that is after the 1st Kathisma -- "Arise", after the 2nd -- "I will praise", and to the theotokion -- "Glory, Both now" together, as is given in the Pochaiv Octoechos of 1880, Moscow 1782 and Greek Typikon Καιφ. β /chapter 2/.
[^57]: In our Irmologions, three more small troparia are added to the Polyeleos, that is, one -- Trinitarian with the refrain "Glory", the second -- Theotokion with the refrain "Both now", and after "Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia", "Glory to Thee, O God" thrice -- yet another theotokion. But because this addition does not exist in Greek rubrics, nor in Slavonic ones, nor in the Typikon of the Lviv Synod, but is generally used among us, we also present it.
[^58]: Tserkovne Oko in chapter Mark 5.
[^59]: Moscow Typikon in chapter 5, page 7, and Peremyshl, page 78.
[^60]: Pochaiv Octoechos at the end, fol. 7 on the verso.
[^61]: Peremyshl Typikon, page 81. -- Usually typikons give for the 6th Ode only one Kontakion-Ikos of the first service, other services, if they have any of this (for in the Menaion they never have an Ikos, nor ever a Kontakion), are transferred to the 3rd Ode before the Sessional Hymn; e. g. May 8, when it falls on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, September 20, November 23, December 4. If there be several Sessional Hymns, then "Glory" is sung to the last one, and "Both now" to its theotokion (Menaion, December 4; Lviv Synod, in the Order of Great Matins).
[^62]: Moscow Typikon in chapter 5. Pochaiv Octoechos does not give the Cross-Resurrection canon, but gives: "Sunday on 4, of the Theotokos on 2, and to the saint on 6" (at the end). However, of the Theotokos must be on 4, as in the case of a Polyeleos saint on 6, when the Cross-Resurrection canon is also not taken.
[^63]: Moscow Typikon, chapter 5 and Μαρκ. Καιφ. 90 /Mark, chapter 90/.
[^64]: Lviv Synod, in the Order of the Hours.
[^65]: Peremyshl Typikon, page 81. -- According to the ancient typikon there was to be a Sunday troparion at all hours, also "Glory" at the 1st and 6th -- Goes also to the first saint, at the 3rd and 9th -- to the second; Kontakia -- alternating: at the 1st and 6th -- to the first, at the 3rd and 9th -- to the second saint (compare John the Theologian on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers). When the Kontakion is only for one saint, then it alone is taken at all [hours]; and when for neither, nor for the feast, then the Hypakoe of the tone is taken; for general Greek editions do not have Sunday Kontakia. Regarding the Hypakoe, you have the rubric in Greek Horologions at the 1st Hour, it and at the other hours must be observed.
[^66]: Lviv Synod in heading 5. According to the Typikon given at the end of our Apostles, and in our previous ones, as also in some Greek service books in Goar, the daily antiphons "It is good" are given, also on Sundays, with the refrain only Sunday on the 3rd antiphon, as the Italo-Greeks also observe. General Greek service books give the Typika on Sunday, and Octoechoi also on weekdays; for in them are given daily stichera on the "Beatitudes", by which is understood the presence of the Typika. With such a difference of typikons let everyone preserve the custom of his Church, and among us the Typikon is -- of the Synod. In vain during the Synod some tried, saying, that to take daily antiphons, instead of the Typika, does not correspond to our rite; for daily antiphons are given not only by the aforementioned service books and apostles, but also by Greek Readers [Anagnostiki] and the Moscow Typikon in chapter 25, and St. Sophronius himself, Patriarch of Jerusalem, in the 7th century, in the explanation of the Divine Liturgy (Spicileg. Rom. tom. 4, nn. 12, 13, 14. Propag. 1840) -- mentions nothing about the Typika, but only about the antiphons "It is good". About the Typika we assume that they were left for the case when there is no Liturgy. For in the beginning numerous in monasticism were of the laity, who could not serve the Holy Liturgy; and therefore, instead of the Liturgy, they had to use the Order of Typika; therefore also the Synod limits them to days in which there is no Liturgy, so that in this way the memory of them was preserved only in monasteries. It is equally good to use antiphons, as also the Typika, when it is taken fully; but when from every psalm only one verse is taken and without stichera on the "Beatitudes", as they practice, then it is better to use antiphons. Finally, the full Typika is quite long and in present times was shortened.
[^67]: Our Sluzhebnik on Sundays from the second to the ninth after the Descent of the Holy Spirit.
[^68]: Moscow Typikon in chapter 3 and Peremyshl, page 79.
[^69]: Troparia and other changeable parts of the Liturgy, according to the previous typikon, were not to be taken only of the Sunday, but also of the saint, if he has anything. (e. g. Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξη. and on verso. /Mark, chapters 68 and 79/; as also our Menaion September 7, if it falls on a Sunday). In previous typikons the saint sometimes did not have a troparion, and sometimes also a Kontakion; sometimes he had either only a troparion, or only a Kontakion, sometimes also a Prokimenon-Alleluia and Apostle and Gospel, and Communion Hymn. However, because later among us troparia and Kontakia were added to all saints, that in the sequence of the Menology, services to a saint without Polyeleos at the Liturgy are not taken; the Greeks, in the case of a saint who has an Apostle-Gospel on a Sunday began taking the Apostle only to the saint, and the Gospel -- only of the Sunday. New Constantinopolitan Typikon, 1851, e. g. September 3. Footnotes
[^70]: Search according to the content given at the beginning of the Psalter. The Psalter is divided into three parts, of which the first covers all weeks from the Sunday of Thomas the Apostle to Great Lent, the second -- Great Lent, the third -- Passion Week. In Bright Week the Psalter is not read.
[^71]: Since the Octoechos gives 6 stichera, and the Typikon does not determine which 3 of the 6 to take, we leave this to the judgment of the Reader. However, to say how it is better, let us first recall that the daily service of the Octoechos is double, that is: on Monday -- Penitential and to the Bodiless [Powers], on Tuesday -- Penitential and to the Forerunner, on Wednesday and Friday -- to the Cross and the Theotokos, on Thursday -- to the Apostles and Nicholas, on Saturday -- to all Saints and the Departed. Thus, in order not to discard either of the two services of the weekday, the Greek Octoechos (Παρακλητική /Parakletike/), printed in the "Propaganda" in 1738, gives from the three stichera of the first service only the two first stichera, and from the three stichera of the second service -- only one, the first. Among us, so that the printed stichera given in the Octoechos do not remain in vain, it would be possible to sing alternating all three stichera of the first service and all three stichera of the second service, that is, one year, odd -- three of the first service, and the second year, even -- three of the second service, or, even better -- one year two first stichera of the first service and one sticheron, the first, of the second service, and the second year -- one sticheron, the third, of the first service and two last of the second service. The Greek Typikon takes nothing from the Octoechos, but only three stichera from the Menaion on 6, repeating each (Καιφ. ε /chapter 5/). The Moscow Typikon takes three first stichera of the Theotokos from the Octoechos, which do not exist in our editions, but we find them in the Greek-Venetian edition; the Moscow Octoechos of 1782 has the same stichera as ours.
[^72]: In the Greek Menaion after the Doxastikon to the saint his Theotokion is also added. If there is no Doxastikon, then only certain most general Theotokia of the Octoechos are indicated by initial words; it is implied that they are known, although the number of Octoechos editions makes their search inconvenient. We cite here some: 1. Θεοτόκε, συ ει ο άμπελος "O Theotokos, Thou Art the vine" (Venetian Octoechos, Tone 6, on the Aposticha); θεον σαρκοΰεντα εκ σου "God incarnate from Thee" (Tone 6, on Saturday, Praises, Moscow edition); Δέσποινα προσδεξαι "O Sovereign Lady, receive" (Tone 8, on Saturday at Matins; Την πασαν ελπίδα "All my hope" (Tone 2, on Thursday, on the Aposticha of Matins). Sometimes the Theotokion is not indicated even by initial words, but is only named generally: θεοτοκιον ομοιον /Theotokion similar/, or only: θεοτοκιον /Theotokion/ (Menaion September 3, August 2); in this case one must select a Theotokion from the Octoechos. Four aforementioned Theotokia are given also on "Lord, I have cried", and on the Aposticha (Menaion November 1 and 3, December 5, July 1). In the last edition of the Venetian Menaion Theotokia are given almost always fully. But among us, at the end of every volume of the Menaion are given all Theotokia that are taken on "Lord, I have cried" and on the Aposticha, and not only for every tone, but also for every day of the week, in order not to repeat the same Theotokia many times. In the Pochaiv Anthologion Theotokia are given only according to the tone, and not also according to the day; and in general services sometimes only the first words are cited, and they themselves are not given.
[^73]: Moscow Typikon, chapter 52, and Peremyshl, page 114.
[^74]: Greek Horologions give only the troparion to the saint, if there be one, if -- not, then the four aforementioned troparia.
[^75]: Μαρκ. Καιφ. οε /Mark, chapter 75/.
[^76]: Moscow Typikon, chapter 52, and Peremyshl, page 115.
[^77]: When two kathismata should be read, and when three, we noted in the note to the Order of Daily Matins on page 41. Regarding small litanies which are read between kathismata and sessional hymns, the Lviv Synod, our Horologions and our Sluzhebnyky (lit. "Service Books") (at the end) give them also at Small Matins, and they are used also by the Greek-Melkites (according to the testimony of their patriarch bl. m. Clement Bahous). Conversely, in the Russian Typikon, approved by their Governing Synod (Moscow edition of 1859), in the Order of Daily Matins it is written that the Priest refuses them only at the Vigil and when the memory of saints having a Polyeleos and Doxology is celebrated; similarly also in the new Wallachian-Bucharest Typikon, in which in the Order of Daily Matins is given: "We take sessional hymns from the Octoechos without litanies" (untranslatable); and adds: "In monasteries, usually, between kathismata litanies are taken only on Sunday and when more special saints occur". From the Greek Typikon no conclusion can be made, for in it small litanies are not mentioned neither at Small Matins, nor at Great, nor before the Canon, nor after the Canon. It is assumed in the Typikon that this is known to everyone. From the rubrics of the Greek Triodion, given at Matins on Meatfare Saturday, one can conclude that these litanies should be refused also at Small Matins. For it gives: η συνηιϊης στιχολογια. Εν δε ταις συναπταις πασαις της στιχολογιας και του Κανόνος, μνημονεύονται πάντες οι προαπελΰοντες Πατέρες και αδελφοί ημων /Ordinary Stichology. In all small litanies of the Stichology and of the Canon, all our fathers and brethren who have passed away before us are commemorated/. Let everyone observe the rubric and custom of his Church. Finally, in our opinion, later typikons reject litanies here only for the sake of greater shortening of the divine service; if the single difference between Small and Great Matins were the rejection or use of litanies, then this difference should have been indicated in some place of ancient liturgical books; however, this is not encountered. What the exclamation of the third litany should be is not indicated in any of the church books. Therefore we are forced to borrow it from Great Matins. At Great Matins in Slavonic books two exclamations are given which are used at the third litany, that is one -- for Sunday "For blessed is" and the second -- for Polyeleos feasts "For holy Art Thou". For the sake of distinguishing the Sunday day from the ordinary day, at Small Matins it is appropriate to use the second "For holy Art Thou", although it would not be bad to use also the first "For blessed is" (Οτι ευλογητοα), for in Greek books we find only this one exclamation, without distinction of day. Regarding Sessional Hymns, they are taken two or three after each stichology, depending on the edition, except the Theotokion. In Lviv editions of the Octoechos and in the Greek-Venetian one, only to the Theotokion is sung "Glory, Both now". In the Pochaiv and Moscow ones a separate refrain is also given to every second, or even to the third sessional hymn. This refrain, corresponding to the content of the sessional hymn: on Monday and Tuesday -- Penitential "O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger"; on Wednesday and Friday -- of the Cross, and on Thursday -- of the Apostles; to the third sessional hymn, that is the Martyron -- also the Martyron refrain: "Wondrous is God in His saints".
[^78]: After the mentioned odes the Canon of the Saint of the Menaion gives his Heirmos.
[^79]: Pochaiv Octoechos, at the end.
[^80]: Pochaiv Octoechos, at the end, fol. 7, on the verso.
[^81]: See the Menaion of the Greek-Venetian edition, when two saints; e. g. September 2.
[^82]: E. g. Menaion September 4. More often in the Menaion, when two saints occur, only one, the first, has a Kontakion and Ikos. Thus September 2 and 3. In the Anthologion every general service has a Kontakion and Ikos.
[^83]: Octoechoi Pochaiv and Moscow, at the end.
[^84]: E. g. Menaion October 24.
[^85]: Octoechoi Pochaiv and Moscow, at the end.
[^86]: Pochaiv Anthologion, November 12, December 4. So also the Greek Menaion, September 23: Μη ύαυμαζης περί της μεγάλης Δοξολογίας: εξεστι γαρ, ως ο το Τυπικον συγγραψαμενος λέγει, και της Οκτωηχου ψαλλομενης, και ως εν ετερω Τυπικω είδαμε ν, του Τω Κυριω ασωμεν λεγομένου, ποιησαι την μεγαλην Δοξολογιαν. Ει δ ουν βουλει, είπε και Αποστιχον της Οκτωηχου /Do not wonder about the Great Doxology; for it is permitted, as he who wrote the Typikon says, even when the Octoechos is sung, and as we saw in another Typikon, of that called Let us sing to the Lord, to perform the Great Doxology. And if you wish, say also the Aposticha of the Octoechos/.
[^87]: Lviv Synod in the Order of the Hours: according to the previous typikon troparion and Kontakion -- only to the saint at all hours (Moscow Octoechos, fol. 358). If the saint did not have a troparion or Kontakion, then the troparia given in the Horologion in the Order of the Hours (which today we limit to Great Lent) were taken, as follows from Greek Horologions.
[^88]: Peremyshl Typikon, page 116. According to the previous typikon at all hours -- troparion of the first saint, Glory: of the second; Kontakia -- alternating, that is: at the 1st and 6th -- to the first, at the 3rd and 9th -- to the second saint. (Moscow Typikon, chapter 58).
[^89]: Our Sluzhebnik on Monday of the second week after the Descent of the Holy Spirit; so also Menaion September 26, in which it is said: "and troparia and Kontakia of temples of saints are not taken".
[^90]: Peremyshl Typikon 1852 edition, page 110.
[^91]: The Greek Typikon gives the whole service only to the saint, and Apostle and Gospel -- first of the day, and then of the saint; Προκειμενον του κατά την ημεραν Αγιου, Αλληλούια του Αγιου, Ευαγγελιον της ημέρας και του Αγιου. (Καιφ. σ) /Prokimenon of the saint of the day, Alleluia of the saint, Gospel of the day and of the saint (chapter 6)/. So also in chapter 99, Mark. Although this rubric is given only in the Saturday service, however, it must be understood that also on other days of the week it should be so. Slavonic typikons prescribe the whole service to the day and to the saint, if he has one, and troparia -- also to the temple, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos. The Moscow Typikon also prescribes to the temple, if the temple is of a saint (although this does not agree with the rubric of that same Typikon, given on September 26 and January 30); this same Typikon ends the Kontakia with the Kontakion for the Dead "With the saints give rest" with the refrain "Glory" and the Kontakion of the temple, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos, if -- not, then with the usual "Protection" ("O Undisputed Intercessor") with the refrain "Both now" (chapter 52). This custom we find also among Greek-Italians and Greek-Melkites, but it does not exist among Constantinopolitan Greeks and Athonites, with the exception of some. But, since according to the rubric of the Greek Typikon, two Apostles and two Gospels were to be taken, and according to the Slavonic rubric, also the whole service of the day and of the saint, if he has one, and, since many saints (over one hundred eighty) have an Apostle and Gospel, as follows from the content of the Apostle-Gospel, therefore, in order to shorten the duration of the divine service, followers of the Greek Rite began already many years ago to reject certain rubrics; therefore also our Ruthenians take at the Liturgy only the service of the day, and reject the saint without Polyeleos; some -- conversely: take only the service to the saint, and reject the service of the day, as evidenced by the Pochaiv Sluzhebnik of 1765, which gives the Apostle and Gospel only on Sundays, and on weekdays -- only in Bright Week and in the week after the Descent of the Holy Spirit, similarly as Latin Missals, which give the Apostle and Gospel of the day only in these two mentioned weeks, for Great Lent and for certain other days. This custom we find also among Greek-Italians, observed also by some of those who are called Orthodox, whom the Moscow Typikon accuses, saying: "The Ecumenical Church does not take neither on the Beatitudes, nor at Liturgies the Apostle and Gospel to the saint on every day, only the sequential, that is the pillar throughout the whole year, in sequence, as also of selected saints who have an Apostle and Gospel. And if the Apostle and Gospel of the saint is read every day, then this is from one's own ignorance, and not according to the church typikon" (chapter 58, at the end). Exactly so also in the manuscript of the three-hundred-year-old Gospel that is among us. However, this rubric of the Ecumenical Church is not observed by the Constantinopolitan Hierarch, called Ecumenical, nor by the Churches subject to him, who (according to the testimony of hierarch Benjamin Νεαπολεος /of Neapolis/, who lived in Constantinople and on Mount Athos, who in our times accepted church union) have the custom, also in monasteries, to take the Apostle and Gospel only of the day, if the saint does not have one, if he has, then only to the saint, and in another they adhere to the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, printed in the patriarchal typography in 1851, marked with the patriarchal seal and confirmed by signatures of all patriarchs and hierarchs subject to them. In this Typikon there, where the rubric gives two Apostles and Gospels, one Apostle-Gospel is given, that is the Apostle -- of the first service, and the Gospel -- of the second service. Thus e. g. October 26, November 21, when they fall on a Sunday and on John the Theologian May 8, when it falls on Ascension.
[^92]: Title 12, chapter 1, § 1, part 3.
[^93]: The most important readings, without doubt, -- are the Sunday and Saturday ones, since in the most ancient Gospels readings are given only for these two days of the week, so in the Ostroh one and in two Vatican ones: one Greek of the 9th century and one Slavonic Glagolitic of the 11th century.
[^94]: E. g. September 7 on the Sunday before the Exaltation.
[^95]: E. g. November 20.
[^96]: E. g. Menaion September 13, October 26, November 1.
[^97]: Today's Greeks, who adhere to the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, since they always take only one Apostle-Gospel, take everything else only one by one, that is: one Prokimenon, one Alleluia and one Communion Hymn. Footnotes
[^98]: So gives the Peremyshl Typikon and so we take. Russian typikons imitate the Greek Typikon on Saturday, which on Saturday and on other days of the week gives all 6 stichera only to the saint; however, it would be better, either to adhere to the Greek Typikon also on other days of the week, or to take three stichera of the Octoechos also on Saturday, as on other days of the week.
[^99]: On Saturday the tone is taken leave of, which began on the previous Sunday and, in view of this apodosis, it ends with the great Theotokia, that is the Sunday ones: on "Lord, I have cried", after the Troparion at Vespers and at "God is the Lord".
[^100]: So the Moscow Octoechos, fol. 356 on the verso, and so we take. Of these three Martyria stichera, given on "Lord, I have cried", according to the rubric of the Greek Typikon, the first is discarded: καταλιμπανοντες το πρώτον (Καιφ. σ) /discarding the first (chapter 6)/; however, in tones that have two Martyria on the Aposticha, the first and second are discarded from "Lord, I have cried". Παρακλητική /Parakletike/ Greek-Venetian, instead of two usual refrains, gives two Martyria refrains: "Wondrous is God" and "To the saints that are in the earth".
[^101]: The Moscow Typikon in chapter 12 and the Moscow Octoechos 1782, at the end of Tone 8, give a Theotokion not in the tone of the saint, but of the current tone. However, this does not agree with Mark (his chapters are located in the Greek Typikon), who says: Τη Παρασκευή εσπέρας και τω Σαββατω εις το θεός Κύριος λεγομεν μετά του Τροπαρίου του Αγιου Δόξα και νυν θεοτοκιον το α εις τον αυτόν ηχον του Τροπαρίου του Αγιου. Το του Ηχου δε πρώτον θεοτοκιον λεγομεν μετά του πρώτου Καθίσματος του ψαλτηρίου, και τα μαρτυρικά εις το Δόξα και νυν, ει ουκ ετυχεν ο ήχος του Τροπαρίου του Αγιου και της Οκτωηχου ο αυτός. Ει γαρ ούτως έχει, λεγομεν το α θεοτοκιον της Οκτωηχου εις το θεός Κύριος, εις δε τα Καθίσματα του ψαλτηρίου Δόξα και νυν θεοτοκιον της ημέρας. Ωσαύτως γίνεται και εν τη κυριακη εις το θεός Κύριος, και εις τα Καθίσματα. (Καιφ. πδ) /On Friday at Vespers and on Saturday at "God is the Lord" we take with the troparion of the saint Glory, Both now: Theotokion, which is of the same tone as the troparion of the saint. The first Theotokion of the tone we take with the first kathisma of the Psalter, and the Martyria at "Glory, Both now", if the tone of the troparion of the saint and of the Octoechos did not happen to be the same. For, if it is so, we take the first Theotokion of the Octoechos at "God is the Lord", and at the kathismata of the Psalter Glory, Both now: Theotokion of the day. Likewise it happens also on Sunday at "God is the Lord" and at the Kathismata (chapter 84)/. Slavonic books of this typikon do not have it for Sunday, but only for Saturday.
[^102]: Commemoration of the day, that is of all saints, occurs after the calculation of the services of the whole week, as you will find at the end of Matins with the addition of Sts. Joachim and Anna.
[^103]: So give our Horologions; so also the Moscow Typikon and Moscow Octoechos; however they, like on other days of the week, take first the troparion of the temple, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos; of the temple of the saint they do not take, "for in the troparia of the day all saints are mentioned". Moscow Typikon, fol. 356, on the verso, Greek Horologions take only the troparion to the saint, if there be; if -- not, then the general troparia, as on other days of the week.
[^104]: Moscow Octoechos in the Saturday service, fol. 357, gives: "and not of the current tone, since the Sunday Theotokion is taken after the 1st sessional hymn, Both now". Similarly also the Moscow Typikon in chapter 52, fol. 352; and Mark in chapter πδ /84/, as you have in the note 3 on page 65.
[^105]: Pochaiv Octoechos at the end of Tone 8 and Moscow at the end of Tone 5, page 72.
[^106]: It is called Martyria from the first troparion of every Ode, dedicated to the Martyrs; however, the whole canon is dedicated to all saints, for other troparia are dedicated to other ranks of saints.
[^107]: Slavonic typikons, in order not to discard the canon for the dead, transfer it to the Panikhida over the Kolyva, or to Compline (Pochaiv Octoechos at the end and Moscow Typikon, chapter 12). The Greek Typikon in chapter 6, instead of the Martyria canon, prescribes the canon for the dead; however, with such a decision the Martyria canon would never be taken: neither on these Saturdays, nor on Souls Saturdays, for even on these Saturdays that same Typikon does not prescribe the Martyria canon. Probably ordinary Octoechoi did not have it.
[^108]: Refrains to the troparia of the Octoechos canon usually are given in Tone 1, and sometimes also in Tone 8 of the Octoechos. According to the ancient typikon odes were taken, as in the Psalter and refrains from them.
[^109]: Pochaiv Octoechos at the end fol. 7, on the verso and 8; and Moscow, vol. 2, fol. 353, on the verso and 357; and Moscow Typikon in chapter 11. The Greek Typikon does not mention the canon of the temple of the Lord or of the Theotokos, but only of the temple of the saint, however, all the more it must be understood, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos; and, instead of the Martyria canon, it takes the canon for the dead (Κοαφ. σ) /chapter 6/.
[^110]: Pochaiv Octoechos at the end fol. 2 and Moscow, fol. 358.
[^111]: Pochaiv Octoechos, ibidem.
[^112]: Moscow Octoechos, fol. 358; otherwise in the Moscow Typikon, which prescribes to take the Theotokion of the current tone (chapter 52, fol. 355).
[^113]: According to the previous typikon at all hours -- troparion and Kontakion only to the saint, if there be. If two saints occur, then at all hours there will be the troparion to the first saint, Glory: to the second. Kontakia -- alternating: at the 1st and 6th -- to the first, at the 3rd and 9th -- to the second. (Moscow Octoechos at the end fol. 355, on the verso).
[^114]: The Moscow Typikon prescribes to take first the Apostle and Gospel to the saint, and then of the day, not as the Greek Typikon (Καιφ. σ) /chapter 6/, and not as Mark (chapter 99), who prescribe: Ευαγγελιον της ημέρας, και του Αγιου /Gospel of the day and of the saint/, and not as Tserkovne Oko, which says: "Prokimenon, Apostle, Alleluia, Gospel and Communion Hymn to the saint of the day, which always precedes the sequential Apostle and Gospel, except for feasts of the Lord" (chapter 8; regarding the Saturday service).
[^115]: According to the previous typikon everything -- only to the saint, if there be; Apostle and Gospel -- first of the day, and then to the saint (Greek Typikon, here on page 61 in 4 Καιφαλ. σ. /chapter 6/). The whole service only of the day is taken only when the saint does not have a troparion so, as Mark says: εν αις ημεραις ου ψαλλεται θεός Κύριος (Καιφαλ. 99) /in those days, when "God is the Lord" is not sung (chapter 99)/. Footnotes
[^116]: Μαρκ. Καιφ. ob /Mark, chapter 79/ and an ancient manuscript typikon, well and intelligently compiled, which we possess, prescribes: "When a saint occurs, whose memory we celebrate on 8 and who has a Polyeleos. If a saint occurs, whose memory we celebrate on 6 and who has a Polyeleos (chapter 35). Similarly also the ancient manuscript typikon of St. Onuphrius in Lviv.
[^117]: On 6 you have in the Pochaiv Anthologion May 10, in the Greek-Venetian Menaion January 11; in Tserkovne Oko and in the Manuscript of the Basilian Fathers May 21.
[^118]: Pochaiv Octoechos 1880, at the end fol. 7, on the verso; Moscow Typikon, chapter 4. Sometimes to a Polyeleos saint in the Menaion a Lytia is given without the blessing of loaves: "since, -- gives the Pochaiv Sluzhebnik, -- usually there is no blessing of loaves, although the Lytia is sung, but only at the Vigil". (At the beginning of Matins); however, among us the Lytia is sung only at the Vigil.
[^119]: Lviv Synod. See e. g. and the Lenten Triodion, 2nd Sunday of Great Lent (Pochaiv 1784, fol. 91, on the verso). The previous typikon does not have this, since it gives a Vigil.
[^120]: Lviv Synod; Peremyshl Typikon, page 84.
[^121]: Lviv Synod and Moscow Typikon, chapter 4.
[^122]: Lviv Synod. So also the Moscow Typikon in chapter 4; only in it nothing is said about Megalynaria, for they -- are a later invention of the Greek-Slavs; however, it gives Megalynaria in the case of a saint with Vigil, in chap. 2.
[^123]: Which is of the sequence of the Octoechos; for if also two Canons of the Theotokos, which are sung on Polyeleos saints, before their canon, are given in our Anthologions after the general services, equal in value with other Theotokion Octoechos canons, however, since the current Octoechos canon is already at hand, one does not need to look for another in another book.
[^124]: Mark, chapter 95, and Pochaiv Octoechos at the end fol. 7, on the verso.
[^125]: Mark, chapter 79; but the Pochaiv Octoechos gives the Sunday Canon on 4, of the Theotokos on 2 and of the saint on 6.
[^126]: Tserkovne Oko in chapter 2, also and the new Moscow Typikon in chapter 4 and our Peremyshl one give 4 canons: "Sunday with Heirmos on 4, Cross-Resurrection on 2, of the Theotokos on 2 and to the saint on 6". And the Moscow Typikon adds: "If two canons of the saint, then both canons on 8, and the Cross-Resurrection is discarded". However, these typikons do not agree with the Greek Typikon, which says: Ιστεον ουν, ότι ει εορτάζεται ο Αγιος του Μηναίου, καταλιμπανεται ο Σταυροαναστασνμος Κανών της Οκτωηχου (Καιφ. β) /Therefore, one must know, that if the memory of a saint of the Menaion is celebrated, the Cross-Resurrection Canon of the Octoechos is discarded (chapter 2)/; they do not agree also with Mark, that in chapter 79, περί Αγιου έχοντος Πολυελεον /about a saint, who has a Polyeleos/ says about the canon: ο Αναστάσιμος εις δ Θεοτόκου εις δ και Αγιου εις σ ει δε εισι δυο Αγιοι, εις η /Sunday on 4, of the Theotokos on 4, to the saint on 6, and if two saints, then on 8/.
[^127]: Moscow Typikon, chapter 4, and Peremyshl, page 85. -- Mark in chapters 78 and 79 prescribes after the 3rd Ode the Sessional Hymn of the saint, Glory, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone, that is Sunday, after the 6th -- Kontakion of the saint. New Constantinopolitan Typikon after the 3rd Ode: Κοντακιον το αναστασιμον χύμα, είτα ψαλλεται το Κάθισμα του Αγιου, και το θεοτοκιον; μετά δε την εκτην ωδην Κοντακιον και Οίκος του εορταζομενου Αγιου /Kontakion of the resurrection spoken, then is sung the Kathisma of the saint, and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode Kontakion and Ikos of the celebrated Saint/. Greek Typikon in chapter 2, after the 3rd Ode -- Κάθισμα του Μηναίου /Kathisma of the Menaion/, after the 6th -- Κοντακιον του Αγιου /Kontakion of the Saint/, after the 9th -- Εξαποστιλαριον το αναστασιμον και του Αγιου ει εορτάζεται, και το θεοτοκιον /Exaposteilarion of the resurrection and of the Saint if he is celebrated, and the Theotokion/, but does not indicate, which Theotokion; however, Slavonic typikons rightly prescribe the Theotokion of the Sunday Exaposteilarion, for it corresponds to the Sunday Gospel.
[^128]: Moscow Typikon, chapter 3, and Peremyshl, page 85; Menaion, e. g. October 26; similarly also Constantinopolitan Typikon, e. g. December 5.
[^129]: Moscow Typikon, chapter 4; and Peremyshl at the 6th Hour prescribes the troparion and Kontakion of the temple, however, the Lviv Synod orders in this case to discard the temple (in the Order of Ordinary Hours). Footnotes
[^130]: Menaion September 28, October 18, February 24, July 15; Moscow Typikon, chapter 15.
[^131]: Menaion October 9, November 14 and 16, January 27.
[^132]: So gives the Pochaiv Anthologion in every general service; for all Theotokia, cited there, are found on the Sunday Aposticha of the corresponding tone. Also the Moscow Typikon, chapter 15, prescribes to select Theotokia in the tone of the saint. In the Menaion the Theotokion will never be from the Sunday Aposticha, but is selected from another day of the week (January 27).
[^133]: Slavonic Menaion, e. g. October 18 and January 25, and new Constantinopolitan Typikon December 6 (for it does not prescribe a Vigil).
[^134]: Although in this case no typikon mentions this canon, however, it is used among us, and this is good. Although in this case the Octoechos is discarded, but, since the Theotokion canon does not have the character of the weekly service of the Octoechos, it can be used at the service of a Polyeleos saint, as also at Matins; for both canons, which precede the canon of the Polyeleos saint at his Matins, are taken from the Octoechos. This corresponds to the Typikon of February 24 on the Finding of the Honorable Head of the Forerunner, when it falls on Cheesefare Saturday.
[^135]: Lviv Synod in the Order of Small Compline. So also Slavonic Horologions; but Greek ones prescribe only the troparion of the saint.
[^136]: One canon you have in the Menaion on December 5. But usually there are two canons. Pochaiv Anthologion sometimes prescribes: Canon of the Theotokos on 4, sometimes with Heirmos on 6; for when it says on 4, it is understood without the Heirmos, which it prescribes twice (Typikon at the end of the Pochaiv Octoechos 1800 on page 8). Sometimes in the Menaion, instead of the aforementioned usual Theotokion canons, there will be a separate canon (December 6, January 30). In general services of the Anthologion only one canon to the saint is given.
[^137]: Pochaiv Octoechos at the end fol. 7, on the verso, and Moscow, fol. 357, on the verso. Footnotes
[^138]: Moscow Typikon, chapter 3.
[^139]: Manuscript Typikon, chapter 31.
[^140]: For the Theotokion that is in the Menaion after the Doxastikon of the saint is not taken, nor in the tone of the Doxastikon.
[^141]: Manuscript Typikon and Moscow in the aforementioned chapters. Also and Mark: To αναστοσιμον στιχηρον του στίχου, και τα γ του Αγοιυ. (Καιφ. 78) /one Sunday sticheron and three of the Saint (chapter 78)/.
[^142]: Mentioned typikons only prescribe: Theotokion in the same tone; and since Sunday Theotokia of Small Vespers -- are solemn, which are also called Δογματικον /Dogmatikon/, the Peremyshl Typikon selects them rightly.
[^143]: Moscow Typikon, chapter 3, and Manuscript, chapter 31; and Mark: Εις την Λιτην στιχηρον του Αγοιυ της Μονής, και του Αγιου στιχηρα; δόξα του Αγιου, και νυν θεοτοκιον του κατά αβ εις τον αυτόν ηχον (Καιφ. 78). At the Lytia -- sticheron of the Saint of the Monastery, Glory: to the Saint, Both now: Theotokion alphabetically in the same tone (chapter 78). Stichera κατά αβ (αλφαβητον) alphabetically -- these are stichera on the Aposticha of Great Vespers, for in the Greek text the initial letters of these stichera (except the first) are given alphabetically; and since in every tone of them -- [there are] three, then with the 8th tone all 24 letters of the Greek alphabet end: 3 x 8 = 24. With this our Menaion, or Anthologion, e. g. October 26, agrees.
[^144]: Manuscript Typikon, chapter 31, and Mark Καιφ. 78 /chapter 78/.
[^145]: Μαρκ. Καιφ. 78 /Mark, chapter 78/. Manuscript Typikon, chapter 31, and Moscow, chapter 3.
[^146]: Aforementioned typikons.
[^147]: So usually our typikons and Russian: Moscow Typikon, chapter 3 and Menaion, e. g. October 26; but Manuscript Typikon and Mark in the aforementioned places give "The Blameless" and Hypakoe of the tone, and also Polyeleos and Sessional Hymns to the saint, Both now: first Theotokion of that same tone, according to Mark, or Theotokion in the same tone, according to the Manuscript Typikon. New Constantinopolitan Typikon does not give "The Blameless", but only Polyeleos and only the last Sessional Hymn of the saint with its Theotokion, "The Angelic Host" and Hypakoe (e. g. December 6).
[^148]: Mark and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe canons on 16, that is Mark: Sunday on 6, of the Theotokos on 2 and to the saint on 8; Manuscript: Sunday on 4, of the Theotokos on 4 and to the saint on 8.
[^149]: Here everything is so, as with a Polyeleos saint on Sunday, where we gave the sources too. Footnotes
[^150]: On the Aposticha January 25, June 24.
[^151]: There is no need to select a Theotokion on the Aposticha of Small Vespers of the Sunday service, as the Peremyshl Typikon prescribes, for in no case is a Theotokion on the Aposticha or on "Lord, I have cried" of Small Vespers selected from the Sunday service, but only from the daily service.
[^152]: Μαρκ. Καιφαλ. πη /Mark, chapter 88/. Manuscript Typikon, chapter 37.
[^153]: E. g. December 5 and January 25.
[^154]: E. g. September 26, October 26, December 5.
[^155]: Pochaiv Menaion June 24 and 29; and Moscow Typikon adds to this and August 29 (chapter 7).
[^156]: Chapter 7, at the end.
[^157]: Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξ•β /Mark, chapter 69/; Menaion November 20.
[^158]: Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/; Manuscript Typikon, chapter 22; Menaion September 9 in the Afterfeast, which falls under a common rule with the Forefeast.
[^159]: Menaion September 9, that is in the Afterfeast.
[^160]: According to the ancient typikon, on Sunday, in view of the All-Night Vigil, everything was taken on Small Vespers only of the Sunday, as usual. But on Great Vespers at the Lytia: one sticheron of the temple, and also stichera of the Forefeast from the Aposticha of Matins. At the Blessing of Loaves: Troparion "O Virgin Theotokos" twice and of the Forefeast once (Menaion September 7), and Mark: "O Virgin Theotokos" thrice without the Afterfeast (Καιφ. ξε /chapter 65/).
[^161]: Peremyshl Typikon prescribes Hypakoe, also Glory, Both now: of the feast. The Greek Typikon does not give anything, for the All-Night Vigil is implied, which excludes Compline. But because in Greek Horologions at the Hours the Kontakion of the feast excludes the Hypakoe, similarly as chapter 77 of Mark, then one can also here at Compline take one Kontakion of the Forefeast without Hypakoe. Similarly and at the Apodosis of the feast the Kontakion of the feast excludes the Hypakoe (Menaion January 14).
[^162]: Menaion November 21; Moscow Typikon November 21 and Mark in chapter 8 prescribes so and this can be extracted from the Typikon of September 7 and August 5, when saints of these days fall in the Afterfeast on a Sunday; for they have a canon only on 4, although they are on 6, as is seen from the marks, given in the Menology at their headings.
[^163]: 3 E. g. September 7. According to the Greek Typikon of Mark: Από γ ωδής Κοντακιον του Αγιου, ει έχει, η το Κάθισμα του Αγιου, δόξα του Αγιου, και νυν το της Εορτής. Αφ. έκτης Κοντακιον της Εορτής. (Καιφ. ξε) /From the 3rd Ode Kontakion of the Saint, if he has, or the Kathisma of the Saint, Glory to the Saint, Both now of the Feast. After the 6th Kontakion of the Feast (chapter 65)/. In chapter 8 of Mark of Tserkovne Oko: after the 3rd -- also Ikos to the saint, after the 6th -- also Ikos of the feast.
[^164]: Μαρκ. Καιφαλ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/ and in Tserkovne Oko, chapter 8, fol. 20: and sometimes of the Octoechos -- 5 and of the feast -- 3 (September 7).
[^165]: E. g. September 7; so also Mark: however, since according to the Greek Typikon there are no Sunday Kontakia, then at all hours only the Kontakion of the Forefeast is taken (Καιφ. οζ/chapter 77).
[^166]: According to the Greek Typikon, since there is no Sunday Kontakion, there will be Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the Forefeast. If also the saint has something, then is taken also to him what he has (Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/). Footnotes
[^167]: Menaion January 3, 4, 5; if sometimes there will be also stichera of the Forefeast, then there will be: of the Forefeast -- 3 and to the first saint -- 3, and to the second saint are taken on the Aposticha, with two of his refrains, as on November 2. And then stichera of the Forefeast on the Aposticha will not be, except "Glory, Both now"; or the Praises are taken, and after the Small Doxology -- the Aposticha, in its own place, as on February 1, when it falls on Meatfare Saturday and is transferred to the previous Friday.
[^168]: E. g. Menaion September 15 and August 9 (according to the most ancient typikons, which prescribe to celebrate the memory of the Holy Apostles on 6, without Polyeleos) and November 20, which has the sign of a saint on 6; also the Typikon, given for Thomas Sunday for the whole Pentecost.
[^169]: Although the service of the day, that is of the Octoechos, fully is not taken, but, instead of it, the service of the feast, however, still something from the daily is taken, namely liturgical Prokimena, which on the Forefeast will be of the day, and in the Afterfeast -- of the feast.
[^170]: Slavonic Menaion, e. g. November 20 and December 20.
[^171]: Μαρκ. Καιφ. οε /Mark, chapter 75/, having given this typikon for the Afterfeast, adds: Ωσαύτως γίνεται και εις τα Προεορτια /Likewise it happens also in the Forefeast/. Pochaiv Anthologion November 20. In the most ancient Menaia two saints in the Forefeast never have two separate troparia.
[^172]: Menaion, e. g. September 7; and Μάρκο Καιφ. ξσ /Mark, chapter 66/.
[^173]: Greek Menaion, e. g. September 7, December 21, August 13.
[^174]: Menaion August 7. In the Menaion sometimes the saint does not have an Ikos, then to the 3rd Ode is transferred only the Kontakion, sometimes does not have neither Ikos, nor Kontakion, and in this case nothing is transferred (Greek Menaion December 20, 21, 24. Sometimes does not have an Exaposteilarion).
[^175]: Menaion November 20, Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξσ /Mark, chapter 66/.
[^176]: Greek Menaion November 20.
[^177]: If there be in the Menaion; in the Anthologion always there will be in general services, But Mark gives such a Typikon: Εάν τυχωσι τα Προεορτια και Μεϋεορτα, και δυο Αγιοι έχοντες Κοντακιά δυο, λέγεται το πρώτον από γ ωδής, και το έτερον αφ έκτης, το δε Προεοπτιον, η της Εορτής, καταλιμπανεται. (Καιφ. ξη) /If the Forefeast and Afterfeast occur, and two Saints having two Kontakia: the first is said after the 3rd Ode, and the second after the 6th, and the Forefeast or the Feast is discarded (chapter 68)/.
[^178]: September 7 and August 5 we find the Forefeast on 8 and to the saint on 4, although he has the sign on 6. However, Mark prescribes to the saint on 6. (Καιφ. ξσ) /chapter 66/.
[^179]: According to the previous typikon at all hours: troparion of the Forefeast, also Glory: to the saint, and Kontakion -- only of the Forefeast (Tserkovne Oko, Mark, chapters 128 and 129, and this "if some saint has a Doxology"); similarly and the Manuscript Typikon in chapter 27. In the case of two saints we do not find a typikon, but it is easy to understand, that at the 1st and 6th Hour at Glory belongs to take the troparion of the first saint, and at the 3rd and 9th -- of the second; and the Kontakion at all -- only of the Forefeast.
[^180]: According to the previous typikon: troparion of the Forefeast and to the saint, if he has, Glory: Kontakion to the saint, if he has, Both now: Kontakion of the Forefeast; everything else -- only to the saint, and Apostle-Gospel also of the day, in the first place. Also to the second saint is taken, if he has something. Before the troparia of the saint Slavonic typikons prescribe to the temple of the saint (Pochaiv Triodion, fol. 11, on the verso.).
[^181]: So Tserkovne Oko and generally Slavonic typikons.
[^182]: Athenian editions add to the entrance [verse] of the feast the usual "Save us, O Son of God" with the refrain of the feast.
[^183]: 2 Ancient Greek Typikon of the Monastery of St. Nicholas των Κασουλων /of Casole/ (Ed. Note: a place in Puglia, southern Italy, where the Monastery of St. Nicholas was located) in the village of Otranto (Bibliotheca Barberina) prescribes "As many as have been baptized into Christ" also on the Transfiguration. And the Greek Typikon of Grottaferrata, that is of the monastery of the reverend father Nilus, near Rome, gives "As many as have been baptized into Christ" not only on the very day of the feast or in Bright Week, but also on all days of the Afterfeast until the Apodosis of the feast; similarly also the new Constantinopolitan Typikon; however, the Greek Typikon, called of St. Sabbas, and following it also Slavonic typikons do not agree with that, for on Thomas Sunday and on Monday after the Descent of the Holy Spirit they explicitly prescribe the Trisagion. Does not agree also the Typikon, called of St. Nicholas. Footnotes
[^184]: So unanimously all Slavonic typikons.
[^185]: Peremyshl Typikon; for the sticheron of Great Vespers is taken at Great Vespers.
[^186]: So all Menaia and Slavonic Anthologions, Moscow Typikon, Manuscript Typikon, chapter 17 and Greek Constantinopolitan Typikon; also Tserkovne Oko in chapter 12; however, allows to take on Glory the sticheron of the feast, and on Both now -- 1st Theotokion of the current tone (Dogmatikon).
[^187]: So general typikons and ours, and Russian. And Tserkovne Oko, chapter 12, and the Manuscript Typikon prescribe first the Kathisma "The Blameless" with "The Angelic Host" and Hypakoe, and also Polyeleos and all Sessional Hymns of the feast once. So also Mark in the case of a saint with Vigil on a Sunday (Κοαφ. οη) /chapter 78/.
[^188]: Tserkovne Oko, and with it also the Manuscript Typikon, on the Entrance into the Temple of the Most Holy Theotokos prescribe the Sunday Gospel, and not of the feast, but why -- we do not know. General, ours and Russian, typikons and the new Greek Constantinopolitan Typikon (page 14) Και εις την Εισοδον /and on the Entrance into the Temple of the Most Holy Theotokos/ prescribe the Gospel of the feast.
[^189]: Tserkovne Oko, chapter 12; Manuscript Typikon, chapter 17, and Menaion. When two feasts, Meeting and Annunciation, fall on a Sunday of Great Lent, they have a canon only on 6.
[^190]: Formerly, when also at this Matins Odes were taken (Μαρκ. Καιφ. ογ /Mark, chapter 73/ and chapter 140 of Tserkovne Oko) it was not possible to take refrains of the feast, but only refrains of the Ode; however, now we take Odes only in Great Lent, with the canon of the feast would be taken, as more appropriate, refrains of the feast.
[^191]: According to the Greek Typikon, the Kontakion at all hours -- only of the feast.
[^192]: Although general typikons, Greek and Slavonic, do not have this, however, the Lviv Anthologion of 1643 (August 15) has it. Some take this refrain also on the antiphons, but it is not necessary to create new typikons.
[^193]: General Slavonic typikons give the Heirmos only on Annunciation and on the Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos; but our Sluzhebnyky and the new Greek Constantinopolitan Typikon -- on all feasts of the Theotokos and of the Lord, until the Apodosis. Footnotes
[^194]: By our custom.
[^195]: Menaion, e. g. September 15.
[^196]: Mark in the Greek Typikon does not prescribe a Prokimenon, nor Alleluia, nor Communion Hymn of the feast (Κοαφ. ξα and ο /chapters 61 and 70/). When someone reads in the weeks the Apostle and Gospel only to the saint, or only for a certain intention, does not need to take it also to the feast, but only then, when he reads the Apostle-Gospel of the day.
[^197]: About the commemoration of the feast at the Dismissal in the Afterfeast we find nothing in Greek typikons. From the Typikon of Slavonic Triodia and of the Moscow Typikon one could conclude that the commemoration of the feast should be taken only on the very solemn day of the feast and on its Apodosis. For it prescribes to take the Paschal Dismissal throughout the whole Bright Week, every day of which has the form of the divine service of the very day of the Resurrection, and afterwards prescribes to take it at the Liturgy of the Apodosis of the Resurrection. However, today we observe the general custom to make the festal commemoration also on other days of the Afterfeast, which has also the rubric of the Sluzhebnik, printed in Stratyn under the Lviv Bishop Gedeon Balaban in 1604, 11 years before the Tserkovne Oko, which gives the following: "Know, that festal dismissals are taken from the day of the feast until the Apodosis of the feast of every day" (page 517). Similarly one could take in Theotokion Afterfeasts, but the words "today" and "solemnly" must be discarded. However, in Afterfeasts of the Lord it is better not to take the commemoration of the feast on Sunday, for it does not combine well with the Sunday commemoration, which must occupy the first place. It would be, e. g. on the Afterfeast of the Nativity of Christ: "Who rose from the dead and Who was born in a cavern in Bethlehem of Judea and let Himself be laid in a manger for our salvation, Christ, our true God". And on weekdays, except Sunday, the commemoration of the feast can be taken without doubt, for then the service of the feast replaces the service of the Octoechos and therefore, instead of the commemoration of the service of the day, that is of the Octoechos, it is good to take the commemoration of the service of the feast. Some on Sunday discard the Sunday commemoration and take only of the feast, but they act contrary to our Sluzhebnyky, which on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, in the middle of the feast of the Ascension before Pentecost, give the Sunday commemoration.
[^198]: Μαρκ. Κοαφ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/.
[^199]: E. g. our Menaia September 8; Moscow Typikon September 8 and November 21; and Mark, because in the general Greek Typikon there is no Sunday Kontakion, prescribes at all [Hours] only the Kontakion of the feast.
[^200]: However, we think, that when the Sunday service coincides with the service of the Afterfeast, the Sunday one must prevail.
[^201]: According to the most general and most ancient typikons in the Afterfeast and on the Apodosis the Trisagion should be taken, and not "As many as have been baptized into Christ" or "Before Thy Cross", for they are taken on the very day of the feast, with the exception of "As many as have been baptized into Christ", which is taken not only on the very day of the Resurrection, but also throughout the whole Bright Week, since throughout the whole Bright Week the divine service takes place as on the very day of the Resurrection. On other days, until the Apodosis of the Resurrection, the Trisagion is taken. So have the general Greek and Slavonic typikons and the most ancient Typikon of the Monastery of St. Nicholas of Casole in the district of Otranto, kept in the Barberini library in Rome, written six hundred or seven hundred years ago. In it on fol. 121 and 124 is given the Typikon, which I gave. With this general and ancient typikon one Greek Typikon does not agree, written by the Reverend Father Bartholomew, a companion of the Reverend Father Nilus and co-founder of the Monastery of Grottaferrata near Rome, kept in that same monastery, which prescribes "As many as have been baptized into Christ" until the Apodosis of the feast. E. g. December 26 gives: Και αντί του Τρισάγιου Οσοι εις Χριστον. Τούτο γαρ λεγομεν έως ου αποδιδοται η εορτή /And instead of the Trisagion As many as have been baptized into Christ. For this we say until the feast is taken leave of/. Does not agree also the new Constantinopolitan Typikon 1851, marked with the seal of the Patriarch. See, e. g. on Monday of the Holy Spirit there, where Greek and Slavonic Triodia have the Trisagion, this Typikon has "As many as have been baptized into Christ". Regarding Troparia, Mark thus: Sunday, Glory: Troparion to the saint, if he has, Both now: Kontakion of the feast (Καιφ. ξε)/chapter 65/.
[^202]: Moscow Typikon and Menaion November 21, September 8 and 15 and February 2. (Moscow Typikon, fol. 176, on the verso) and Mark Καιφ. ξε /chapter 65/ prescribe, according to the ancient typikon, also of the day, and to the saint, if he has; if -- not, then only of the day, and to the saint -- nothing. Mark, chapter 8, in Tserkovne Oko: if -- not, then sequential and of the Theotokos. Footnotes
[^203]: E. g. September 15 and 16 in the Menaion.
[^204]: This is the Typikon of the Pochaiv Octoechos (1800) and Moscow 1782, at the end, according to the prescription about the Temple of the Resurrection of Christ: "If the Forefeast or Afterfeast of feasts of the Lord or of the Theotokos joins in Saturday and on other days of the week, except Sunday, also on the Deposition of Her Robe in Blachernae and on the Deposition of the Honorable Belt the Octoechos is not taken, except the Dogmatikon on "Lord, I have cried" on Friday evening". Does not agree with this typikon the Typikon of our and Moscow Menaion and of Tserkovne Oko, given on the Afterfeast of the Meeting in Cheesefare Saturday, where will be given not the 1st Theotokion of the tone, but the Sticheron of the feast.
[^205]: E. g. September 15; in Tserkovne Oko September 16 and in the Greek Menaion: Exaposteilarion to the saint once.
[^206]: Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξσ /Mark, chapter 66/ and Menaion September 15.
[^207]: Menaion September 16; Greek Menaion November 24.
[^208]: According to the previous typikon at all hours: troparion of the feast and Glory: to the saint, if he has; and Kontakion -- only of the feast (Tserkovne Oko in chapters 128 and 129 of Mark). In the case of two saints after the troparion of the feast is taken on Glory alternating troparion to the first and second saint, and Kontakion -- only of the feast.
[^209]: Some take daily antiphons "It is good"; others -- Typika; according to the previous typikon -- are taken also to the saint, if he has something.
[^210]: Slavonic Menaion September 8 and Mark in Tserkovne Oko, chap. 9.
[^211]: According to the previous typikon, when there was an All-Night Vigil, on the Lytia -- stichera of the feast from the Vespers Aposticha of that day (Pochaiv Menaion September 8); and according to the Moscow Typikon -- also stichera to the saint and his "Glory"; however, it orders to take the Glory Sticheron later, on the Aposticha.
[^212]: Pochaiv Menaion, e. g. January 7.
[^213]: E. g. April 23 and May 8.
[^214]: Menaion November 21; Mark, chapter 77.
[^215]: The Typikon of the Slavonic Menaion November 21, and chapter οσ /76/ of Mark of the Greek Typikon and 8 of Tserkovne Oko prescribes at all hours only the Kontakion of the feast.
[^216]: Slavonic Menaion November 21, Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/, in Tserkovne Oko, chapter 8.
[^217]: Examples of this case you have in the Menaion January 11, April 23 and 25, May 9 and 21.
[^218]: January 11 only 6, all -- to the saint.
[^219]: So also on the Synaxis of the Forerunner on January 7.
[^220]: Our and the Greek-Venetian Menaion.
[^221]: Menaion April 25 and 30; May 9, 21 and 25. Sometimes we encounter the canon of the feast on 8 and of the saint on 6, as in the Greek Menaion and in the Moscow Typikon January 11. However, we think, if a Polyeleos saint is celebrated on 8, as it usually happens today, then there will be a canon to the saint on 8; and if he is celebrated only on 6, then there will be only on 6. Examples of a Polyeleos saint on 8 and on 6 we gave here on page 70.
[^222]: E. g. January 11, May 9 and 25.
[^223]: April 25, May 21.
[^224]: April 23, January 11.
[^225]: E. g. April 23 and the Typikon of the Menaion, that on the Sunday before the Resurrection; Moscow Typikon, fol. 362, on the verso.
[^226]: Typikon of the Menaion September 15 does not give at the end even a troparion to the saint; however, the Typikon of the Theologian on the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearing Women does not refuse him.
[^227]: According to the Typikon of George and the Theologian on the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearing Women.
[^228]: Menaion September 12; December 31, January 13.
[^229]: Menaion September 21.
[^230]: Slavonic Menaion December 31: and troparion on the Apodosis of the Resurrection and Descent. It would be possible to add also the commemoration of the feast, if the feast is of the Theotokos, but to pronounce, that the Dormition (Nativity, Entrance into the Temple) of the feast we take leave of.
[^231]: Menaion January 14; and Moscow Typikon January 14.
[^232]: Chapter 63 of Mark in the Greek Typikon prescribes after the 3rd -- Sessional Hymn, after the 6th -- Kontakion-Ikos of the feast.
[^233]: Not taking one of those that are before "Glory".
[^234]: According to the general Greek Typikon and Mark, chapter 63, at all hours -- only Kontakion of the feast.
[^235]: According to the Greek Typikon: Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the feast.
[^236]: E. g. Menaion August 13.
[^237]: Menaion on the Apodosis of the Nativity, Entrance and Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos.
[^238]: Menaion, e. g. September 21, August 13 and 23.
[^239]: Menaion December 30 and January 14; and Tserkovne Oko in chapter 118 of Mark.
[^240]: Here on page 106 in 3.