PART IV
RUBRICS OF THE TRIODIA
SUNDAY OF THE PUBLICAN AND PHARISEE
Note: The service of a saint which falls on this Sunday, or on the Sundays of the Prodigal Son, Meatfare, and Cheesefare, we sing on the preceding Friday at Compline, or as the Ecclesiarch decides.
AT Great Vespers
1.	"Blessed is the man", as usual.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: 7 of the Octoechos and 3 of the Triodion, that is, the two given at "Lord, I have cried" and the one from the Doxastikon of the Litiya; Glory: Triodion, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the current tone (Dogmatikon).
3.	Aposticha of the Sunday Octoechos, Glory: Triodion, Both now: Theotokion of the Sunday Aposticha according to the tone of the Doxastikon.
4.	At the end: Sunday Troparion, Glory, Both now: Sunday Theotokion according to its tone.
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Triodion only.
Midnight Office - Sunday.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory, Both now: Sunday Theotokion according to its tone.
2.	Everything else up to the canon is of the Sunday, as usual, only after the 50th Psalm, instead of Glory: "Through the prayers of the holy apostles" and the rest, at all odes of the Sundays of the Triodion we sing: Glory: "Open to me the doors", Both now: "Lead me on the paths of salvation", and after the verse "Have mercy on me, O God", the sticheron: "Thinking upon the multitude".
3.	Canons 4 [making] 14: Octoechos Sunday with heirmos on 4, Cross-Resurrection on 2, Theotokos on 2, and Triodion on 6. Katavasia: The sequential "I shall open". After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Triodion; after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion; after the 9th - "Holy is the Lord our God" and the Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: Triodion, Both now: Its Theotokion.
4.	Stichera of the Praises - 8: 4 of the Octoechos and 4 of the Triodion with two Sunday verses, Glory: Triodion, Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
5.	Everything else to the end of Matins - as usual.
6.	After the dismissal of Matins - Glory, Both now: Gospel Sticheron. (Thus we sing on all Sundays until the Sunday of All Saints, as the Typikon prescribes. However, on the Sunday of All Saints itself and on the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearers, the Typikon places the Gospel Sticheron in its proper place).
AT THE HOURS: At all [Hours], the Sunday Troparion, and the Kontakion is of the Triodion.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	After the Entrance: Sunday Troparion, Glory: Kontakion of the Triodion, Both now: Usual Theotokion, as outside the Triodion period[^466].
2.	Prokimenon and Alleluia of the Sunday tone.
3.	Epistle and Gospel of the Sunday.
4.	Communion Hymn "Praise the Lord".
Notes
1.	On the other six days of this week, the Triodion has nothing, and it yields place to the Octoechos.
2.	During this week, the Typikon permits meat even on Wednesday and Friday[^467].

SUNDAY OF THE PRODIGAL SON
Everything is according to the rubric of the Sunday of the Publican and Pharisee, here on page 317, only at Great Vespers, on "Lord, I have cried", there will not be 7 stichera of the Octoechos and 3 of the Triodion, but 6 of the Octoechos and 4 of the Triodion. At Matins, to the two psalms of the Polyeleos, we add the third "By the waters of Babylon". We celebrate Vespers and Matins in the same way on Meatfare and Cheesefare Sundays[^468].
Note: In the five subsequent days of this week, the Triodion has nothing and therefore yields place to the Octoechos, only at Compline we do not take the Canon of the Theotokos, also on Saturday, and at Matins we read only two kathismata. We celebrate in the same way during Cheesefare Week, with the exception of Wednesday and Friday[^469].

MEATFARE, OR SOUL SATURDAY
Notes
1.	The service of the saint of the day is transferred to the preceding Compline or to another day, and the Saturday service of the Octoechos and Triodion remains.
2.	At Vespers, instead of the Prokimenon, and at Matins, instead of "God is the Lord", we sing "Alleluia".
RUBRIC
AT VESPERS
1.	"In peace let us pray to the Lord" for the dead[^470].
2.	Kathisma proper.
3.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera: 3 Martyria of the Octoechos of the current tone and 3 of the Triodion, Glory: Triodion, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone (Dogmatikon).
4.	Instead of the Prokimenon of the day, we sing Alleluia in Tone 8 with two verses for the dead.
5.	Aposticha of the Octoechos of the current tone, Glory: Triodion, Both now: also Triodion.
6.	At the end: Troparion for the dead ("By the depth of wisdom"), Glory, Both now: its Theotokion "Thee as a wall and haven".
7.	"Have mercy on us, O God", dismissal for the dead and "In blessed falling asleep".
AT COMPLINE
1.	We do not take the Canon of the Theotokos, as was prescribed for the Sunday of the Prodigal Son.
2.	After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion "With the saints give rest".
AT MATINS
1.	"In peace let us pray to the Lord" for the dead.
2.	Instead of "God is the Lord", we sing Alleluia in Tone 8 with three verses for the dead, as found at the end of the Horologion[^471].
3.	Troparion for the dead twice, Glory, Both now: its Theotokion.
4.	Kathisma 16 proper, Small Litany and Sessional Hymn of the Octoechos of the current tone.
5.	Everything else up to the canon, as at the Parastas, that is, Kathisma 17 ("The Blameless") with its verses, divided into two stations, the first of which concludes with the litany for the dead, and the second - with the troparia for the dead "The Choir of the saints", then we sing the litany for the dead, and at the end - the Sessional Hymn for the dead and Psalm 50.
6.	Canons 2 [making] 14: Temple on 6 and Triodion on 8. Katavasia after each ode - Heirmos of the Triodion canon. After the 3rd Ode - usual litany and Sessional Hymn of the Triodion; after the 6th - usual litany and Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion; after the 9th - usual litany and Exaposteilarion of the Triodion. The refrain to the troparia of the temple canon will be the usual one, corresponding to the form of the canon, and to the troparion of the Triodion canon - "Give rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants".
7.	Stichera of the Praises - 4 of the Triodion, Glory, Both now: Triodion.
8.	Small Doxology.
9.	Aposticha of the Octoechos, Glory, Both now: Triodion.
10.	Troparion and Glory, Both now: Theotokion for the dead, as at Vespers.
11.	Litany "Have mercy on us, O God" and dismissal for the dead and "In blessed falling asleep", as at Vespers.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Troparion and Kontakion for the dead.
AT THE LITURGY: Everything - for the dead, only the Epistle and Gospel first of the day, and afterwards - for the dead.

MEATFARE SUNDAY
Of the Last Judgment
We sing everything according to the rubric of the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, here on page 319.

CHEESEFARE WEEK
Notes
1.	The Synod of Lviv permits meat during this week, except on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, on the condition of [reciting] 5 "Our Father" and 5 "Virgin Theotokos" for the laity and Psalm 50 for the clergy. On the other three days, we use dairy products.
2.	The divine services of this week approach the Lenten [order], however, gradually, for Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday have only certain parts in the Triodion, while all other parts are filled by the Octoechos and Menaion. Wednesday and Friday have in the Triodion a fuller order of Lenten character with prostrations[^472]. Saturday and Sunday, although they have a full service in the Triodion, nevertheless are not of Lenten form, as are all Saturdays and Sundays of Great Lent. The parts that Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday have in the Triodion are as follows: 1. Aposticha at Vespers and at Matins. 2. 2nd Sessional Hymn at Matins before the Canon. 3. Canon of the Triodion, usually double, that is, with two heirmoi.
The Odes of the Triodion triodion [three-ode canon] in the first five days of this week, as of all weeks of Great Lent, follow this sequence:
On Monday: 1st, 8th, and 9th.
On Tuesday: 2nd, 8th, and 9th.
On Wednesday: 3rd, 8th, and 9th.
On Thursday: 4th, 8th, and 9th.
On Friday: 5th, 8th, and 9th.
RUBRIC
ON CHEESEFARE MONDAY, TUESDAY, AND THURSDAY
Everything - according to the general rule for a saint without Polyeleos on weekdays, only:
AT VESPERS
On Sunday and on Monday evening[^473]
Instead of the Aposticha of the Octoechos, there will be the Aposticha of the Triodion with the two usual verses of the Horologion. If there is a Doxastikon for the saint, then we select the Theotokion from the Octoechos according to the tone of the Doxastikon.
AT COMPLINE: The Canon of the Theotokos is not taken[^474].
AT MATINS
1.	Instead of the 2nd Sessional Hymn of the Octoechos, it will be - of the Triodion.
2.	Canons: where there is no triodion [three-ode canon], there will be two of the Octoechos and one of the saint, as usual; but where there is a triodion, both canons of the Octoechos are omitted and the canon of the saint is sung alone or two together (if there are two) with heirmos on 6[^475] and both canons of the triodion on 8[^476]. The Katavasia will be after Odes 3, 6, 8, and 9, and also where there is a triodion, always the heirmos of the last canon.
3.	Aposticha of the Triodion with the usual verses of the Horologion.
ON CHEESEFARE WEDNESDAY AND FRIDAY
Note
In view of the Lenten form of the church services of these days, violet vestments should be used, since at Matins, instead of "God is the Lord", "Alleluia" is sung on these days, as on the days of Great Lent; therefore, the Typikon prescribes three prostrations (small) at the beginning of Vespers at the Trisagion and at "O come, let us worship", and also after the pre-introductory psalm at "Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God"[^477], as well as after each of the three antiphons of the Kathisma (although now we read only the beginning of the Kathisma), after "Vouchsafe, O Lord", and after the Trisagion following "Now letteest Thou Thy servant depart". In addition to this, the Aposticha will be of the Triodion.
RUBRIC
On Tuesday and Thursday evening
AT VESPERS
1.	From the beginning to the troparia after "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart", everything - according to the general rubric for a saint without Polyeleos on weekdays, however, with prostrations.
2.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" with the Trisagion - 3 troparia, that is, "Virgin Theotokos", Glory: To the Baptist, Both now: "Intercede", each with a prostration at the end, and "Beneath Thy tender mercy", without a prostration[^478].
3.	From "Lord, have mercy" (40) to the end, everything - as in the Horologion; however, at the last Trisagion and at "Blessed be the name of the Lord", which must be said before the psalm "I will bless the Lord", there will be three prostrations (small); and at the prayer of St. Ephrem - 16 prostrations[^479], that is, 3 great, 12 small, and again one great, as at the daily Midnight Office after "Thou Who at all times"[^480]. Dismissal with the usual commemorations of the service of the day and the saint.
Notes on Prostrations
1.	The prostrations we make at the three first troparia, according to the Typikon - are not great, but small, although due to ignorance of the rubric, or due to excessive piety, great ones are made among us. For here this prostration is called simply metanoia, and with the addition megale [great] it is given only at the prayer of St. Ephrem and never at the end of Vespers, after the litany "Have mercy on us, O God". Likewise at the Great Canon the rubric does not prescribe great prostrations, but simply metanoias.
2.	Neither Greek nor Slavonic rubrics give the form of the great or small prostration. However, according to custom it will be thus: he who makes a great prostration falls on his knees and touches the ground with his forehead; he who makes a small prostration does not fall on his knees, nor touches the ground with his forehead, but only crossing himself reaches the ground with his right hand, or only to the knees as the Synod of Lviv prescribes in Title V "On the Holy Liturgy", in the prayers before the iconostasis before the Proskomedia[^481]. We reach the ground with the right hand when we bow to the Holy Mysteries; only to the knees when we bow to holy icons, or at various supplications. However, our people in these parts do not have the custom, when bowing, to extend hands to the ground, or to the knees, but only crossing themselves to bow low before the Holy Mysteries, and higher - in other circumstances. We suppose, however, that at small Lenten prostrations we should reach the knees with the hand, for throughout the whole year at the Trisagion and at "O come, let us worship" we make prostrations, not reaching the knees with the hand[^482].
AT Great Compline
Note on Prostrations
We make three small prostrations: 1. At each Trisagion (which will be five times), except the Trisagion after the supplicatory verses "O All-holy Lady", for immediately after them, before the Trisagion, follows "O God, absolve", at which there were already three prostrations. 2. At each of the three "O come, let us worship"[^483]. 3. At "Alleluia" after the first and second Trisagion. 4. At "O God, absolve" after the supplicatory verses to the Most Holy Theotokos. 5. At each supplicatory verse - one small prostration and at the prayer of St. Ephrem - 16 prostrations: 4 great and 12 small[^490][^484].
RUBRIC
The rubric for Great Compline is here on pp. 26-27 [→REF:p26-27], only:
1.	After the Creed, the prostrations at the supplicatory verses take place thus: The 1st choir begins: "O All-holy Lady Theotokos, pray to God for us", and the 2nd Choir makes a prostration, then rises and responds, and the 1st Choir makes a prostration. So also at all other supplicatory verses. And when we say "O God, be merciful to me, a sinner" (3), both choirs sing together and make three prostrations (Greek Triodion, Monday of the 1st week of Lent).
2.	After "It is truly meet" we do not sing the Troparion "O Lord of Hosts, be with us" with its verses, but the usual troparia, as at Small Compline, that is: of the weekday, of the Temple, and "O God of our fathers" with the other three[^485]; and on the days of Great Lent we sing "O Lord of Hosts, be with us".
AT THE Midnight Office
We make three small prostrations: at each Trisagion, at both "O come, let us worship" and at each Glory: "The Blameless". At the prayer of St. Ephrem - 16, that is 4 great and 12 small.
AT MATINS
Note
We make prostrations according to the rubric of Lenten Matins: 1. At "Alleluia" of each "Glory" of the Kathismata - three prostrations[^486]. 2. After "It is truly meet" - 1 prostration[^487]. 3. At the Doxology[^488] - 3 prostrations[^489]. 4. At the final Trisagion - 3 prostrations. 5. At the prayer of St. Ephrem - 16 prostrations: 4 great and 12 small.
RUBRIC
1.	From the beginning to the end of the litany "In peace let us pray to the Lord", everything - as usual for every day.
2.	Instead of "God is the Lord" we sing Alleluia in the current tone of the Octoechos and the Trinity Hymns of the tone.
3.	Two Kathismata with the usual prostrations at "Glory"; after the 1st Kathisma - Sessional Hymn of the Octoechos; after the 2nd - Sessional Hymn of the Triodion, then Psalm 50 and immediately - Canon[^491].
4.	Canons 3 [making] 14: first of the Octoechos (the second of the Octoechos is not taken) with heirmos on 6, of the Menaion of the saint on 4, and of the Triodion on 4. In those odes where the triodion [three-ode canon] occurs, we sing the canon of the Triodion on 6 and both canons of the triodion together on 8, and one more separate troparion with the refrain "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee"[^572][^561], and instead of the Katavasia it will be the heirmos of the second canon of the triodion. In the odes in which there is no triodion, we suppose that the Katavasia will be the heirmos of the last canon, that is, of the Triodion, after each ode, as given in the Triodion on Cheesefare Friday, for these two days have a common rubric, although for Wednesday it is given imprecisely. The Canon of the Octoechos and Menaion in these odes, according to the rubric of the Greek Triodia, is omitted[^492]. The rubrics of the Slavs, for Whom the Greek length is not enough, prescribe transferring the odes of the Menaion canon to the preceding ones, in which the triodion has no place, and they sing on Wednesday the 1st ode of the Octoechos with heirmos on 4, the 1st and 3rd odes of the Menaion (without Theotokia) on 6 and the Triodion on 4. On Friday - the 4th ode of the Octoechos on 4, the 4th and 5th odes of the Menaion on 6 and the Triodion on 4. Similarly, the 6th ode of the Octoechos on 4, the 6th and 8th of the Menaion on 6 and the Triodion on 4. Also the 6th ode of the Octoechos on 4, the 7th and 9th of the Menaion on 6 and the Triodion on 4. The Biblical Odes in the Psalter we do not sing[^493]. To the troparia of the canon we chant the usual refrains (on pp. 29-30 [→REF:p29-30]). After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn to the Saint, after the 6th - Kontakion to the Saint, and if there is none, then we recite the Martyricon of the Octoechos of the current tone, given at the end of the Triodion, after the Sessional Hymns of Matins. In general, in our modern Horologia Kontakia are given to all saints[^494]. After the 9th Ode - Trinity Exaposteilarion of the tone.
5.	Before the Small Doxology the Priest exclaims: "To Thee belongs glory".
6.	Aposticha of the Triodion.
7.	After "It is a good thing" with the Trisagion - Troparion "Standing in the temple", then "Lord, have mercy" (40) and the rest with 16 prostrations, as in the Horologion at the end of Matins.
AT THE HOURS
Everything - according to the Lenten rubric of Holy Great Lent, except the Stichology of the Psalter, which is not taken here. Therefore, it will be:
1.	Three small prostrations: at "O come, let us worship", at the Trisagions, at Alleluia after the three psalms, at "How shall we call Thee"; and at the prayer of St. Ephrem - 16 usual ones[^495].
2.	After the conclusion of the three psalms with Alleluia, the troparion is sung, called also the Prokimenon, with two verses in the tone of the Prokimenon. "The appointed reader (or priest) sings in the middle of the church the Troparion 'In the morning' (at the 1st Hour, and at the others - the specific one), and we sing loudly the same and bend our knees to the ground. Exactly so at the other two verses and again the same troparion"[^496]. This bending of the knees is done three times: once - after the singing of the troparion before the verse, once - after the singing of the troparion after the 1st verse, and once - after the singing of the troparion after the 2nd verse[^497]. After singing the troparion with its verses, we say Glory, Both now: Theotokion and make three prostrations. (At the 6th Hour, immediately after the Theotokion, there will be the Troparion of the Prophecy and one reading of the Prophecy between two Prokimena in the Triodion).
3.	Then we sing "Direct my steps" with 4 verses, that is: "Direct my steps" twice, "Deliver me" twice, "Make Thy face to shine" twice and "Let my mouth be filled" three times. These verses - only at the 1st Hour, and at the others - only one troparion without verses.
4.	After the Trisagion, instead of the Kontakion, the Lenten Troparia are sung, which are in the Horologion.
5.	"Lord, have mercy" (40), "Thou Who at all times" and the rest with the prayer of St. Ephrem and 16 prostrations.
6.	Trisagion with "Our Father", "For Thine is the Kingdom" and "Lord, have mercy" (12).
7.	Final prayer: at the 1st Hour - "O Christ, the True Light", and at the others - the other one.
8.	"Glory to Thee, O Christ God" and the rest and dismissal.
Note: The Hours 3rd, 6th, and 9th, Typika and Vespers in the cathedral temple are sung together, beginning at 11 o'clock in the morning[^498].
TYPIKA (Typika)
Everything - as in the Horologion (Molitvoslov), however:
1.	Without stichera on the Beatitudes and without Epistle and Gospel.
2.	At each of the three "Remember us, O Lord" - one small prostration[^499].
3.	After 16 (or 15) prostrations at the prayer of St. Ephrem, we immediately begin Vespers, and the prayer "O All-holy Trinity" and the rest of the Typika is transferred to the end of Vespers.
AT VESPERS
On Wednesday evening for Thursday and on Friday evening for Saturday
1.	Begins from "O come, let us worship".
2.	Kathisma proper.
3.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera: 3 of the Octoechos and 3 of the Menaion, Glory: of the Saint, if He has one, Both now: Usual Theotokion of the tone and day. (On Friday all 6 stichera - of the Triodion and the 1st Theotokion of the departing tone).
4.	Instead of the Prokimenon of the day we sing two Prokimena of the Triodion, and between them - one reading of the Triodion (so also on Friday).
5.	After the 2nd Prokimenon - immediately "Vouchsafe".
6.	Aposticha of the Triodion.
7.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" - Troparion to the Saint, Glory, Both now: Dismissal Theotokion of the tone and of the day of the week[^500]. (On Friday evening - Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the Troparion).
8.	Litany "Have mercy on us, O God" and 3 great prostrations, without prayer.
9.	"O All-holy Trinity", "Blessed be the name of the Lord", "I will bless the Lord", "It is truly meet" and dismissal from "Glory to Thee, O Christ God".
Note: Although according to the rubric on Wednesday and Friday the Liturgy is not celebrated, nor the Presanctified, nevertheless, the Synod of Lviv permits our churches to celebrate also on these days the Liturgy of Chrysostom[^501].
AT COMPLINE
On Wednesday evening we read Small [Compline]. We do not take the Canon of the Theotokos, but we sing the Canon of the Menaion of the saint who falls on Saturday.
ON CHEESEFARE THURSDAY
AT MATINS, AT THE HOURS AND AT THE LITURGY
Everything - according to the general rule for a saint without Polyeleos on weekdays, however, at Matins look for the rubric here on page 324.
ON CHEESEFARE FRIDAY
On Cheesefare Thursday evening and on Friday morning we sing the service exactly as on Wednesday, here on pp. 324-325 [→REF:p324-325].
ON CHEESEFARE SATURDAY
We commemorate all the Venerable Fathers who shone forth in asceticism.
AT VESPERS: On Friday evening everything - according to the rubric for Wednesday evening, here on page 322.
AT COMPLINE
1.	Instead of the Theotokion Canon we sing the Canon for the Dead of the Octoechos of the current tone from Matins.
2.	After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Fathers[^503].
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the Fathers twice, Glory, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the Troparion of the Fathers.
2.	Two Kathismata with Sessional Hymns of the Triodion, Psalm 50 immediately Canon.
3.	Canons 2 [making] 14: of the Temple Saint with heirmos on 6 and of the Triodion of the Fathers on 8. Katavasia - Heirmos of the Canon of the Fathers. We read the usual refrains. (To the Canon of the Fathers - "Venerable Fathers, pray to God for us")[^504].
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Fathers; after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the Fathers, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the Fathers.
4.	4 Stichera of the Praises of the Fathers, Glory: of the Fathers, Both now: "O Theotokos, Thou Art the Vine".
5.	After the Great Doxology - Troparion to the Fathers, Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the [Troparion of the] Fathers.
6.	Great Dismissal with commemoration of the Fathers.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Troparion and Kontakion of the Fathers.
AT THE LITURGY: Everything - only to the Fathers, and the Epistle and Gospel first of the day, and then - to the Fathers.
CHEESEFARE SUNDAY
Of the Expulsion of Adam
We sing everything according to the rubric of the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, here on page 319.
On Cheesefare Sunday and on all Sundays of Great Lent
AT VESPERS
Notes
1.	Since the five first weekdays of each week of Great Lent, that is Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday have a service of Lenten form, beginning from Sunday evening, we use sacred vestments of Lenten colors, according to the previous rubric - purple, according to the Synod of Lviv - violet.
2.	We do not make prostrations at Vespers of these Sundays from the beginning of Vespers, but from "Vouchsafe, O Lord". We make, therefore, three small prostrations after "Vouchsafe, O Lord" and at the Trisagion following "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart"; and 3 great prostrations - at the troparia, at "Virgin Theotokos" and at the prayer of St. Ephrem, without the 12 small ones[^505].
3.	No Kathisma.
4.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: 4 Penitential of the Octoechos of the current tone, 2 given at the Aposticha of Vespers and 2 at the Aposticha of Matins (which are taken from the Octoechos and given at the end of the Triodion), 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Menaion of the saint; Glory: of the saint, Both now: Usual Theotokion in the tone of the Doxastikon; if none, then Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Menaion.
- If two saints fall, we sing to one in the evening 3 stichera, and to the other the Stichera of the Praises on 4[^506].
- If a saint on 6 falls, we sing to him 3 stichera, just as to a saint on 4[^507].
5.	Entrance, on account of the Great Prokimenon.
6.	Instead of the Prokimenon of the day we sing the Great Prokimenon of the Triodion (on this Sunday, on the 2nd and 4th: "Turn not away"; on the 1st, 3rd and 5th: "Thou Hast given an inheritance").
7.	After the Prokimenon there will be no litany[^508]; the Priest takes off the phelonion and closes the holy doors, and we say "Vouchsafe, O Lord" and after this we make 3 small prostrations.
8.	Aposticha of the Triodion with the usual verses of the Horologion, only, if there be Glory: of the saint, then the Theotokion will be the usual one, in the tone of the Doxastikon.
9.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" and the Trisagion with three small prostrations we sing 3 troparia with prostrations, that is "Virgin Theotokos" and a prostration, Glory: "O Baptizer of Christ" and a prostration; Both now: "Intercede for us" and a prostration, and then "Beneath Thy tender mercy" without a prostration.
10.	"Lord, have mercy" (40) and the rest, as in the Horologion, however, only up to the end of the 3rd great prostration of the prayer of St. Ephrem, we do not make other small prostrations[^509], but the Priest immediately: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God" and the dismissal of the day with the commemoration of the saint[^521].
AT COMPLINE
We sing Small Compline with the Lenten prostrations, that is 3 small prostrations at "Glory to God in the highest", at the Trisagion following "It is truly meet" and after the prayer of St. Ephrem[^510] and 16 usual ones at the prayer of St. Ephrem. We do not omit the Canon of the Theotokos, since there was no All-Night Vigil.
BEGINNING OF GREAT LENT
Note: The Synod of Lviv permits on all days of Great Lent, except Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, meat, on the condition of [reciting] 5 "Our Father" and 5 "Virgin Theotokos" for the laity, and Psalm 50 - for the clergy; on the other three days - dairy products.

GENERAL RUBRICS
FOR THE FIVE FIRST LENTEN DAYS OF ALL WEEKS
OF GREAT LENT
AT THE Midnight Office
On the first day of Great Lent we do not make prostrations at the Midnight Office, except three great ones at the prayer of St. Ephrem, and on other Lenten days we make 3 small prostrations: 1. At each of the three Trisagions. 2. At both "O come, let us worship". 3. At each Glory: "The Blameless"; also 16 usual ones at the prayer of St. Ephrem, that is 4 great and 12 small[^511].

AT MATINS
Note: We begin prostrations from the Kathismata and make: 1. At "Alleluia" of each "Glory" of the Kathismata - 3 prostrations[^512]. 2. At "More honorable" of each of the 6 verses of the Song of the Theotokos - 1 prostration. 3. At "It is truly meet" - 1 prostration. 4. At "Glory to God in the highest" - 3 prostrations. 5. At the final Trisagion - 3 prostrations. 6. At the prayer of St. Ephrem - 16 prostrations, that is 12 small and 4 great.
RUBRIC
1.	From the beginning to the end of the litany "In peace let us pray to the Lord", everything, just as on every day.
2.	Instead of "God is the Lord" we sing Alleluia in the sequential tone of the Octoechos.
3.	We sing three Trinity Hymns of the current tone, given in the Horologion, three for each tone. They are all sung three times with the refrain "Glory" to the second, and "Both now" - to the third. At each first one we make a commemoration of the weekday service, at the second - a commemoration of all saints, at the third - a commemoration of the Theotokos. However, since the weekday service of the week changes daily, and the troparia are sung the same each day of the week (except Saturdays and Sundays, on which, because they are not Lenten, the Trinity Hymns are not sung), at the end of each first Trinity Hymn a colon is given, which signifies that the troparion must be completed with the commemoration of the weekday service, the form of which is indicated at the end of the 3rd troparion of Tone 1.
Note
These three commemorations we make also at the Exaposteilaria following the canon. But the Lenten Exaposteilarion has only one troparion in each tone, which is sung three times, therefore, when it is sung the first time, the commemoration of the weekday service is added to it, when - the second time, with the refrain "Glory", then - the commemoration of all saints, and when the third time, with the refrain "Both now", then - the commemoration of the Theotokos. These commemorations are added where the colon is given, that is before "And save me".
4. Three Kathismata with their Sessional Hymns, the Sessional Hymns of which, sung after the 1st Kathisma, are of the Octoechos of the current tone, given also at the end of the Triodion. The Sessional Hymns sung after the 2nd and 3rd Kathismata are of the Triodion.
5. Psalm 50 and the first petition of the Great Litany "Save, O God", and after the exclamation "Through the mercy and compassion" immediately - the Canon.
6. Odes and Canons. The Biblical Odes, given at the end of the Psalter, are intertwined with the odes of the canon, as given: before the ode of the canon the corresponding ode of the Psalter is recited, leaving its last verses for refrains to the troparia of the canon, in such quantity as there will be troparia in the ode of the canon, including the heirmos, except two, for to the penultimate troparion we refrain "Glory", and to the last - "Both now". The 2nd Ode is recited in full before the ode of the canon, and to the troparia of its canon we refrain: "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee". According to our ancient custom, the Odes of the Psalter are recited only in those odes in which the triodion occurs, and in the other odes we refrain the usual refrains to the troparia of the canon. The Greek Typikon prescribes singing the Odes of the Psalter in the tone of the Menaion canon, but now we do not even know what their melody was.
The Canons will be only of the Menaion and Triodion, for the Octoechos, according to the Greek rubric, during Great Lent is not sung, with the exception of Sundays. In some odes there will be 3 canons on 14, that is of the Saint of the Menaion with heirmos on 6 and both canons of the Triodion on 8: one on 4 and the second on 4. In some odes there will be only one canon of the saint on 4, and in the second ode there will be only two canons of the Triodion on 8, with heirmos on 9. This difference regarding the number of canons and their troparia in the odes arises because the Triodion canons do not occur daily in all odes, but in general only in three odes in the following sequence:
On Monday: 1st, 8th and 9th.
On Tuesday: 2nd, 8th and 9th.
On Wednesday: 3rd, 8th and 9th.
On Thursday: 4th, 8th and 9th.
On Friday: 5th, 8th and 9th.
On Saturday: 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th.
Therefore, there will be:
On Monday: at Odes 1, 8, and 9 - 3 canons on 14, that is of the Menaion with heirmos on 6 and both canons of the triodion on 8, and afterwards - one more separate troparion of the Triodion with the refrain "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee", and the Katavasia - Heirmos of the 2nd canon of the triodion. At other odes there will be only one canon of the saint on 4, with heirmos on 5; only at Odes 3 and 6 the canon of the saint is read without the heirmos, for it is taken afterwards, as Katavasia[^513].
On Tuesday: at the 2nd Ode, since the saint does not have this ode, there will be only two canons of the triodion on 8, and afterwards - one more separate troparion and Katavasia - Heirmos of the 2nd canon of the triodion; at the 8th and 9th Odes - 3 canons on 14 exactly as on Monday. At other odes there will be only the canon of the Menaion on 4 exactly as on Monday.
On Wednesday: at the 3rd, 8th, and 9th Odes there will be 3 canons on 14 exactly as at the 1st, 8th, and 9th Odes on Monday. And at other odes there will be only one canon of the saint on 4, as on Monday.
On Thursday: at the 4th, 8th, and 9th Odes there will be 3 canons on 14, as on Monday. At other odes - only the canon of the saint on 4 and the rest, as on Monday.
On Friday: at the 5th, 8th, and 9th Odes there will be 3 canons on 14, as on Monday; and at other odes - only one of the saint on 4.
On Saturday: at the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th Odes there will be 3 canons: one of the saint and two of the Triodion, at other odes there will be two canons: of the temple and of the saint; however, for Saturday a separate rubric will be given, since Saturday is not a Lenten day.
•	If two saints fall, then we read both their canons together on 6[^514], that is of the first saint with heirmos on 3 and of the second without heirmos on 3. So also to the saint on 6.
The Katavasia will be always the heirmos of the last canon either of the triodion, or of the Menaion: of the triodion where there will be a triodion, and where there will be only the Menaion, then the Katavasia of the Menaion will be only after Odes 3 and 6, for at the 8th and 9th there will always be a triodion and therefore there will always be the Katavasia of the triodion.
A more precise example of the combination of the Odes of the Psalter with the Odes of the Canon is given at the 1st Ode in the Moscow Typikon, and is presented as follows: "After this we begin: 'Let us sing to the Lord' in the tone of the canon of the Menaion of the saint of the day and the verses of the odes are recited hurriedly, each Choir - its verse, until they reach 'The waters became thick' and from this they begin verses on 14, and we sing the Menaion with heirmos on 6. And we sing thus: the first Choir reads the verse 'The waters became thick' and sings the heirmos. The second Choir reads the second verse 'The enemy said' and, after it, - the troparion of the canon, and in sequence verses by choirs up to 'Then hastened'. From the verse 'Then hastened' we begin the triodion of Kyr Joseph on 4. And at 'The Lord reigning' we sing the 2nd triodion of Kyr Theodore the Studite, and one choir sings the troparion, and the second choir - the 2nd verse and the troparion. After this both choirs, having united, sing: Glory: Trinity Hymn, in a higher voice, Both now: Theotokion. Then we sing in the highest voice: 'Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee', and we sing the other troparion of Theodore, because the ode has 5 troparia. At the end we sing the Katavasia - heirmos of the second canon"[^515].
Regarding the refrains to the troparia of the canon, know that in order to find the number of refrains as quickly as possible, the last four, six, and eight verses of the Biblical Odes (except the 2nd, for it is read in full before the heirmos) from the bottom up are marked in the middle of the song, or on the side, with the inscription: "on 4, on 6, on 8". But on 14 they are not counted off, since 6 verses from 8 upwards are easily counted. However, the counting of 14 verses in current Psalters does not coincide exactly with the counting in previous Psalters, for where the rubrics place the 14th verse at "The waters became thick", current Psalters place the 14th verse at "The enemy said", and "The waters became thick" moves to the 15th verse. The 6th Ode has only 12 verses, so do not forget to divide these two verses of it on 4. The 9th Ode, one, of the Theotokos, is sung whole before the heirmos with "More honorable", and the other, of Zachariah, is sung whole in the refrains, and in those editions where there are only 13 verses, one verse must be divided into 2.
The last edition of the Lviv Psalter does not give the counting of the last verses, except for the 9th Ode; and, in general, in recent editions they did not care about the counting of verses.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Saint[^548], after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint; if the saint does not have this, then the Martyric Sessional Hymn of the Octoechos of the current tone, given also at the end of the Triodion. After the 9th Ode - "It is truly meet" and after the litany - Exaposteilarion of the tone, which is in the Horologion, three times, with refrains and commemorations, as the Trinity Hymns, here on page 338, in the note.
1.	Before the Small Doxology the Priest exclaims: "To Thee belongs glory" and the rest, and at "Glory to God in the highest" we make three prostrations.
2.	Aposticha of the Triodion, Glory: of the saint, if there be, Both now: Usual Theotokion in the tone of "Glory".
3.	"It is a good thing" twice; at the Trisagion - 3 prostrations and, after "Our Father", - Troparion "Standing in the temple"; then "Lord, have mercy" (40) and the rest with 16 prostrations at the prayer of St. Ephrem and, after the last prostration, immediately - "O come, let us worship" three times and the 1st Hour.

AT THE HOURS
1.	We make 3 small prostrations: at "O come, let us worship", at each Trisagion, at "Alleluia", which is after the three psalms, and at "Alleluia" after each antiphon; at each of the three singings of the troparion with two verses we bend the knees[^517] and, after the Theotokion, - 3 prostrations, and at the prayer of St. Ephrem - 16 usual ones.
2.	After the three psalms with "Alleluia" - Kathisma proper according to the Lenten marker of the Psalter, except the 1st Hour on Monday and the 1st and 9th Hours on Friday, for then there will be no Kathisma.
3.	Troparion ("In the morning" at the 1st Hour, and at the others - the other one specific to the Hour) with two verses and with the bending of knees at each of the three singings of the troparion, then Glory, Both now: Theotokion ("What shall we call Thee" at the 1st, and at the others - the other, specific to the Hour).
4.	Selected verses from the Holy Scripture of the Old Testament, that is: at the 1st Hour - "Direct my steps", at the 3rd - "Blessed is the Lord God", at the 6th Hour - "Let Thy compassions come quickly", at the 9th - "Forsake us not". At the 1st Hour "Direct my steps" is divided into 4 verses, of which we sing the first 3 twice, and the 4th - three times. At the 6th Hour between the Theotokion and the Old Testament verses we sing the Troparion of the Prophecy of the Triodion and one prophecy between two Prokimena there.
5.	After the Trisagion, instead of the Kontakion, we read three Lenten troparia, according to the order of the Hours in the Horologion, adding to the 2nd "Glory", and to the 3rd - "Both now".
6.	"Lord, have mercy" (40), "Thou Who at all times" and the rest with the prayer of St. Ephrem and with 16 usual prostrations.
7.	Trisagion with 3 prostrations, and after "Our Father" - the exclamation "For Thine is the Kingdom" and "Lord, have mercy" (12).
8.	Final prayer of the Hour and "Glory to Thee, O Christ God", dismissal of the weekday with the commemoration of the saint at the 1st Hour, and at the other Hours, since they are combined with the Typika, there will be no dismissal, but it will be at the end of the Typika.
Notes
1.	In the archcathedral temple the Hours 3rd, 6th, 9th, Typika and Vespers are celebrated together, beginning at 11 o'clock in the morning, and in the afternoon, at the usual time of Vespers, - Great Compline[^518].
2.	The last prayer of the 9th Hour "O Master Lord Jesus Christ" is transferred to the Typika, to the place of the prayer "O All-holy Trinity", and the prayer "O All-holy Trinity" with the psalm following it is transferred, according to the rubric of our Pochaiv Triodion, to the end of Vespers[^519]. And on Wednesday and Friday, since Vespers will be with the Presanctified, "O All-holy Trinity" cannot be transferred to the end of Vespers, for it ends with the Liturgy and therefore remains in its place at the Typika, exactly so the prayer "O Master Lord Jesus Christ" remains in its place at the 9th Hour.

AT THE TYPIKA (Typika)
Note: The first part of the Typika, from the beginning to the Beatitudes, falls out in Great Lent, and the last, from "O All-holy Trinity", is transferred to the end of Vespers. In the middle part the stichera on the Beatitudes and the Epistle and Gospel fall out.
RUBRIC
1.	"The Beatitudes", that is "Remember us, O Lord", "Blessed are the poor in spirit" and all other verses, then "Glory, Both now". After this both choirs, having come together, with uncovered heads, sing in a higher voice:
"Remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest into Thy kingdom".
And a great prostration[^520].
"Remember us, O Master, when Thou comest into Thy kingdom".
And a great prostration.
"Remember us, O Holy One, when Thou comest into Thy kingdom".
And a great prostration.
2.	"The Choir", verse and again "The Choir", Glory: "The Choir of holy angels", Both now: "I believe".
3.	"Remit, pardon" and "Our Father".
4.	Kontakia, which are in the Horologion.
5.	"Lord, have mercy" (40), "Glory, Both now" and the rest with the prayer of St. Ephrem and 16 usual prostrations, as in the Horologion.
6.	Trisagion with 3 prostrations and the rest with "Our Father" and "Lord, have mercy" (12).
7.	Priest - prayer of the 9th Hour "O Master Lord Jesus Christ".
8.	Dismissal of the day with the commemoration of the saint.

AT VESPERS
On Monday, Tuesday and Thursday evening,
without Presanctified.
Note on Prostrations
We make three small prostrations: at "O come, let us worship", at "Alleluia" after the pre-introductory psalm and after each of the three antiphons of the Kathisma (although now we read only the beginning of the Kathisma); after "Vouchsafe, O Lord", at the Trisagions; at the prayer of St. Ephrem - 16 usual ones and one prostration after "It is truly meet"[^522].
RUBRIC
1.	Priest: "Blessed is our God"; choir: "O come, let us worship" three times with prostrations.
2.	After the pre-introductory psalm, at Alleluia, - 3 prostrations.
3.	18th Kathisma with 3 prostrations at Alleluia after each of its antiphons (today we read only the beginning of the Kathisma).
4.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera: 3 of the Triodion and 3 of the Menaion, Glory, Both now: Theotokion of the Menaion. If there is a Doxastikon of the saint, then Theotokion - usual, in the tone of the Doxastikon.
- If two saints fall, we sing to one in the evening stichera on 3, and to the 2nd in the morning at the Praises - stichera on 4[^523].
- If a saint on 6 falls, we sing to him stichera on 3, just as to a saint on 4; thus we sing also in the middle of a feast, e. g. December 20 and September 15.
5.	Prokimenon of the Triodion and one reading of the Triodion, and afterwards also another Prokimenon and second reading of the Triodion.
6.	After the 2nd reading immediately - "Vouchsafe" and 3 prostrations.
7.	Aposticha of the Triodion with the usual verses of the Horologion. If there is a Doxastikon of the saint, then we select the Theotokion in His tone, as on "Lord, I have cried"; if not, then Glory, Both now: Triodion.
8.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart", at the Trisagion, - 3 prostrations; and after "Our Father" - troparia "Virgin Theotokos" and the two others with a prostration at the end of each, then "Beneath Thy tender mercy" without a prostration.
9.	"Lord, have mercy" (40) and the rest, as in the Horologion, with the prayer of St. Ephrem and 16 usual prostrations.
10.	Trisagion with prostrations and, after "Our Father", - "Lord, have mercy" (12).
11.	"O All-holy Trinity" and "Blessed be the name of the Lord" (3) with prostrations.
12.	Glory, Both now: Psalm "I will bless the Lord".
13.	"It is truly meet" and a prostration; Glory, Both now: "Lord, have mercy" (2), "Lord, bless".
14.	Dismissal "O Christ our true God" with the commemoration of the service of the day and the saint.

AT Great Compline
1.	At the usual time of Vespers we sing Great Compline with prostrations, as we mentioned for Tuesday and Thursday evening of Cheesefare week, here on page 327.
2.	On Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of the first week of Great Lent, after "O come, let us worship", we recite Psalm 69 "O God, come to my assistance", given in the order of Great Compline after the 3rd "O come, let us worship", after the prayer "O Master God the Father"; then one fourth part of each ode of the Great Canon (Matins on Thursday before the 5th Sunday of Lent)[^524]. Refrain to the troparia of the canon - "Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me"[^525], to the troparion of St. Mary of Egypt - "Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us", and to the troparion of St. Andrew - "Venerable Father Andrew, pray to God for us". According to the rubric, 3 small prostrations should be made at each troparion of the canon, however, among us this is not done, since there are no people in church at that time.
The rubric for Great Compline we have partly here on page 327, and partly - in the Horologion.

VESPERS ON WEDNESDAY AND FRIDAY WITH PRESANCTIFIED
Note on Prostrations
On Wednesday we make 3 small prostrations: at the Trisagion at the beginning, at "O come, let us worship", at "Alleluia" after the pre-introductory psalm and after each antiphon of the Kathisma and at "Let my prayer be set forth". Great prostrations, according to local custom, we make at "Light of Christ", when the Priest blesses the people crosswise with the triple-candle; at the conclusion of the singing "Let my prayer be set forth" and after "Now the Powers of Heaven", when the consecrated Lamb is taken from the artophorion and placed on the diskos[^526]. And on Fridays at Vespers and at Compline we do not make prostrations, only the prescribed ones at the Presanctified, that is: after "Let my prayer be set forth" - 3 prostrations[^527], after the Entrance of the Holy Gifts - 3 prostrations and at "Let my prayer be set forth" - 3 prostrations, and among us also at "Light of Christ" - 3 prostrations.
RUBRIC
1.	After "Blessed is the Kingdom" we recite "O Heavenly King", Trisagion (with prostrations) and, after "Our Father", - "Lord, have mercy" (12), Glory, Both now: "O come, let us worship" three times (with prostrations).
2.	Of the eight prayers recited at the prefatory psalm, the Priest recites here only the last 5, for the first three he has to read afterwards, one at each of the three antiphons of the Kathisma.
3.	18th Kathisma, with a prayer at each of its three antiphons and with a Small Litany after each antiphon.
4.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: Triodion on 6 and Menaion on 4, Glory, Both now: Theotokion of the Menaion. If there is a Doxastikon of the saint, then we select the Theotokion in His tone. (On Friday evening stichera: Idiomelon of the Triodion twice, Martyria of the Octoechos of the current tone - 4[^528] and of the Saint - 4, Glory: of the saint, if there is one, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the departing tone; if not, then Glory, Both now: the same Theotokion).
5.	Entrance with the Censer (on the Finding of the Precious Head of the Forerunner, on the 40 Martyrs and on Great Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday[^566] entrance - with the Gospel).
6.	At "O Gladsome Light" - Prokimenon of the Triodion, one reading of the Triodion and the second Prokimenon of the Triodion[^529]; then the Priest, having taken the triple-candle with the censer and exclaiming "Wisdom, Aright", begins "The Light of Christ", blessing with the triple-candle crosswise to the east, then, blessing to the west, says: "Illumines all"[^530]; all make three prostrations to the ground, and the Reader sings: "The Reading from Proverbs" and, when the Priest or Deacon exclaims: "Let us attend", reads the second reading of the Triodion.
7.	"Let my prayer be set forth". Has after it three verses and is sung six times, that is: twice - before the first verse, once - after each verse and again once at the end. And among us the first time "Let my prayer be set forth" is sung by the Priest, the second time - by the Choir, all three verses - by the Priest, after each the Choir - "Let my prayer be set forth", the last time in a higher voice up to the half - the Priest, and from the half - the Choir. Where there are two choirs, they sing "Let my prayer be set forth" alternately: the first begins after the Priest, and the second half is sung by both choirs together. When the Priest sings, he himself stands, and the Choir and people kneel; when the Choir sings, the Choir stands together with the people, and the Priest kneels. If there are two choirs, the one singing stands, and the other kneels; people who are on the side of the right choir kneel, stand and sing with the right choir, and those on the left - with the left[^531].
The Priest sings "Let my prayer be set forth" first in front of the altar, then the 1st verse - on the south, the 2nd - on the west, the 3rd - on the north side, and at the end the first half - again in front of the holy table[^532]. He censes each side of the altar twice, that is before the beginning of his singing and at the end of the Choir's singing, that is at "The lifting up of my hands", for then, having censed, he moves to the next side of the altar, in order to cense there also, so that the Choir is ready to sing its verse[^533].
8.	Immediately after the end of the singing of "Let my prayer be set forth" is exclaimed "Let us all say" and according to the order - Liturgy of the Presanctified.
Notes
1.	If there is no Liturgy of the Presanctified, then we sing Vespers according to the rubric of Monday, Tuesday and Thursday evening, that is from the 10 stichera on "Lord, I have cried" we transfer the first 3 to the Aposticha, and the other 6 we sing on "Lord, I have cried"[^534]; and there will be on Wednesday stichera of the Triodion - 3 and of the Menaion - 3, and on Friday Martyria of the Octoechos - 3 and of the Menaion - 3. On Friday evening, after "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart", there will be no Lenten troparia with prostrations, but the Troparion of the Saint, Glory, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones, in the tone of the Troparion of the Saint[^651] and, after the litany "Have mercy on us, O God", - 3 great prostrations[^535] and the Great Dismissal, as usual.
2.	If on this day falls a saint with Polyeleos, namely the Finding of the Precious Head of the Forerunner and the 40 Martyrs, and also on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of Passion Week[^536], then immediately after "Let my prayer be set forth" there will be censing and on the two previously named feasts their Epistle and Gospel are read, the Gospel - beginning from "Wisdom, Aright". On the three days of Passion Week only the Gospel is read, beginning from "And that we may be accounted worthy", since there is no Epistle.
3.	By the decision of the Synod of Lviv, the pastor must celebrate the Liturgy of the Presanctified on every Wednesday and every Friday of Great Lent and on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of Passion Week.
Note on the number of prostrations per day. The number of prostrations made in church reached once 300 per day, excluding the Midnight Office: "Three hundred during the day and night, without the Midnight Office". (Greek Triodion, our Manuscript Typikon and Tserkovne Oko (lit. "Eye of the Church") on the 1st Monday of Lent).

FIRST SATURDAY OF GREAT LENT
Memory of the Holy Great Martyr Theodore the Tyro[^537]
On Friday evening
AT VESPERS WITH PRESANCTIFIED: Everything according to the general rubric, here on page 349.
AT COMPLINE
Note
Compline on all Fridays of Great Lent, according to the Greek rubric, is Small, and according to the Pochaiv Triodion, Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon - Great. However, in our times, when abbreviations prevail, we should adhere to the Greek rubric, the more so because even in our Horologia, in the order of Great Compline, troparia are given only for 4 days of the week, that is for Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. We do not make prostrations, as was already said on page 349.
RUBRIC
1.	If it be Small Compline, then after "It is truly meet" we recite the Kontakion of the Great Martyr; if Great, then after the 1st Trisagion - Troparion of the Great Martyr, Glory, Both now: Theotokion (Sunday, in the tone of the Troparion of the Saint)[^538]; after the 2nd Trisagion - usual troparia "Have mercy on us, O Lord"; after "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Great Martyr, and the Troparion "O Lord of Hosts" we do not recite[^539].
2.	At Compline we sing the Canon for the Dead, which is in the Octoechos for the current tone, and the Canons of the Menaion to the saints of the nearest Saturday and Sunday we sing, if the Ecclesiarch prefers, one - at Compline on Friday with the Canon for the Dead, and the other - on Sunday at Compline[^540]. The Greek Triodion adds: "we do so on all Friday evenings of holy and Great Lent". Before the Canon for the Dead we should sing also the usual Theotokion Canon of the Octoechos, for the rubric does not exclude it[^541].
AT MATINS
1.	From the beginning to the canon everything - according to the general rubric for a saint without Polyeleos on Saturday, except the 2nd Sessional Hymn, which will not be of the Octoechos, but of the Triodion of St. Theodore.
2.	Canons 3 [making] 14: Temple with heirmos on 6 and two of Theodore on 8. Katavasia after each ode - "I shall open".
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Saint, after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the Saint.
3.	Stichera of the Praises to the Saint on 4, Doxastikon - to him, and Theotokion - in the Triodion.
4.	Small Doxology and, after "Let us complete", - Aposticha of the Saint with his two verses and the subsequent order of Matins according to the rubric for a saint without Polyeleos on Saturday.
AT THE HOURS: At all: Troparion and Kontakion to the Saint.
AT THE LITURGY: Everything - to the Saint, and the Epistle and Gospel first - of the day, and then - of the Saint.

FIRST SUNDAY OF GREAT LENT
Of Orthodoxy
[^542]Notes
1.	The Triodion service of this Sunday has neither an All-Night Vigil nor a Polyeleos[^543], but is combined with the Sunday service of the Octoechos.
2.	The service of a saint without Polyeleos we sing at Compline or on another day.
AT Great Vespers
1.	"Blessed is the man", as usual.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: Sunday of the Octoechos - 6 and of the Triodion - 4, Glory: Triodion, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone (Dogmatikon).
3.	Sunday Aposticha, Glory: Triodion, Both now: Triodion.
4.	At the end: Sunday Troparion, Glory: "We venerate Thy most pure image", Tone 2; Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the same Tone 2.
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Triodion only.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: "We venerate Thy most pure image", Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the same Tone 2.
2.	Everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual, only "Glory" will be "Open to me the doors", Both now: "Lead me on the paths of salvation" and at "Have mercy on me, O God": "Thinking upon the multitude".
3.	Canons 3 [making] 14: Octoechos Sunday on 4, Cross-Resurrection on 2, Theotokos on 2 and Triodion on 6[^544]. Katavasia of the Triodion.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Triodion; after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion; after the 9th - Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: Triodion, Both now: Triodion.
Stichera of the Praises - 9: 5 of the Octoechos and 4 of the Triodion, the three last - of the Triodion, Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
4.	After the Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of the two usual ones.
5.	After the dismissal - Glory, Both now: Gospel Sticheron.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Sunday Troparion, Glory: "We venerate Thy most pure image", Kontakion of the Triodion.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Troparion Sunday and "We venerate Thy most pure image", Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the Triodion.
2.	Everything else - of Orthodoxy, only Communion Hymn - "Praise the Lord" and "Rejoice in the Lord".

MONDAY, TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY, THURSDAY AND FRIDAY
OF THE SECOND WEEK OF GREAT LENT
Everything - according to the rubric for Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of the 1st week of Great Lent, here on page 347 and following.
Note
Let it be known that from this Monday of the 2nd week of Lent the canons of the saints in the Menaion, which fall from the Saturday of Lazarus to the Sunday of Ap. Thomas, are sung at Compline with the Theotokion Canons. First the Canon of the Theotokos is sung, and after it - the Canon of the Menaion. After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion and Sessional Hymn of the Menaion, and after the 6th - Sessional Hymn of the Theotokos; after the canon - Stichera of the Menaion (Triodion of this day).

SATURDAY OF THE SECOND WEEK OF GREAT LENT
Note
The service of this Saturday, as also the services of the 3rd and 4th Saturdays of Great Lent, differ from the services of Meatfare Saturday and the Saturday before the Sunday of Pentecost in that it does not exclude fully either the service of the Menaion, or the service of the day of the Octoechos, that is to all saints and the dead. The services of Meatfare Saturday and the Saturday before the Sunday of Pentecost exclude generally the service of the Menaion, and from the service of the Octoechos little is taken, but have their own order in the Triodion exclusively for the dead. Therefore, we suppose that the two litanies for the dead: "In peace let us pray to the Lord" and "Have mercy on us, O God", which according to our later rubric are given at Vespers and at Matins, and the litany for the dead "Again and again", which is said between the odes of the canon, should be taken only on these two Saturdays which are exclusively for the dead, and on the other three - usual litanies.
RUBRIC
AT VESPERS WITH PRESANCTIFIED
1.	18th Kathisma.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: Idiomelon of the Triodion of the day twice, 4 Martyria of the Octoechos and 4 of the Menaion of the saint, Glory: of the saint, if there be, but if not, then Glory: Sticheron for the Dead of the tone, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the departing tone.
3.	Instead of the Prokimenon of the day of the Horologion there will be Prokimenon of the Triodion and reading, second Prokimenon and second reading of the Triodion, then "Let my prayer be set forth" and the rest of the Presanctified.
Notes
1.	After the end of the Presanctified, in other services of this day (except the Panakhida for the dead) vestments of red color should rather be used, than black, for red ones are - predominantly for martyrs.
2.	If there be no Presanctified, then we sing Vespers according to the rubric given here, on page 347.
AT COMPLINE: Compline, according to the Greek rubric, we sing Small. After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Triodion "With the saints give rest"[^546].
Midnight Office - Saturday.
AT MATINS
1.	Instead of "God is the Lord" we sing Alleluia in Tone 2 with verses.
2.	Troparion of the day "Apostles, prophets" twice; Glory: "Remember, O Lord", Both now: Theotokion "Holy Mother".
3.	After the 1st Kathisma - Small Litany and Sessional Hymn of the Octoechos of the current tone.
4.	17th Kathisma ("The Blameless"), in two stations, with refrains and troparia "The Choir of the saints"; after each station - litany for the dead, then we sing the Sessional Hymn "Give rest" with its Theotokion and Psalm 50.
5.	Canons 3 [making] 14: of the Temple of the Lord or Theotokos with heirmos on 6, of the Saint of the Menaion on 4 and of the Octoechos of the current tone the second[^547] on 4. If the Temple is of a Saint, then - Canon of the Saint with heirmos on 6, Temple on 4 and Octoechos on 4. From the 6th Ode, leaving the Canons of the Temple and Octoechos, we sing the Canon of the Saint of the Menaion on 6 and both canons of the tetraodion on 8. Refrain to the troparia of the tetraodion - "Holy Martyrs, pray to God for us". At the end of the eight troparia of each ode of the tetraodion we add two more troparia: one Martyric with the Martyric refrain, and the second - for the dead with the refrain for the dead. From the two Martyric refrains "Wondrous is God" and "To the saints that are in His earth" and from the two refrains for the dead "Their souls" and "Blessed are they Whom Thou Hast chosen", the first we refrain to the Martyric and for the dead of the 6th and 8th Odes, and the second - to the Martyric and for the dead of the 7th and 9th Odes. Katavasia after Odes 3, 6, 7, 8, and 9 - Heirmos of the last canon: after the 3rd - of the Octoechos, after the others - of the Triodion.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Saint, after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos for the Dead, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the Octoechos (to all saints, Glory: to the dead).
6.	Stichera of the Praises, Martyria of the Octoechos - 4, Glory: for the Dead, Both now: Theotokion of the "Glory".
7.	After the Small Doxology at the Aposticha - Stichera for the Dead of the Octoechos with their verses for the dead.
8.	At the end: Troparion to all saints ("Apostles, prophets"), Glory: for the dead "Remember, O Lord", Both now: "Holy Mother".
AT THE HOURS: At all - Troparion of the day ("Apostles, prophets"), Glory: "Remember, O Lord", Kontakion "With the saints give rest".
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Troparia: "Apostles, prophets" and "Remember, O Lord"; Glory: Kontakion "With the saints give rest", Both now: "Thee as a wall and haven".
2.	Everything else - of the day and of the dead.
SECOND SUNDAY OF GREAT LENT
Everything - according to the general rubric for a saint without Polyeleos on Sunday, here on pp. 47-54 [→REF:p47-54], only:
AT Great Vespers: On "Lord, I have cried" there will be 6 Sunday stichera of the Octoechos and 4 to the saint of the Menaion.
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Triodion.
AT Great Matins
1.	Before the Canon we sing "Open to me the doors" and the rest, as on the first Sunday of Lent.
2.	Canons: Sunday of the current tone with heirmos on 6, Triodion on 4 and Saint of the Menaion on 4.
After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion and Ikos of the Sunday and to the Saint, if he has one; Glory: his Sessional Hymn, Both now: his Theotokion; after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion.
3.	Stichera of the Praises - 9: Sunday of the Octoechos on 8, with the usual verses of the Praises psalms, one of the Triodion with the verse "Arise, O Lord my God", then Glory: and again the same sticheron; Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
4.	At the end of Matins - Glory, Both now: Gospel Sticheron.
AT THE HOURS: Instead of the Sunday Kontakion we read the Kontakion of the Triodion, the rest - according to the general rubric.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Instead of the Sunday Kontakion we sing the Kontakion of the Triodion.
2.	Sunday Prokimenon of the current tone and the rest - according to the general rubric.

THIRD WEEK OF GREAT LENT
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday
Everything - according to the general Lenten rubric given for the first week of Great Lent, here from p. 347.
Third Saturday of Great Lent
Everything - according to the rubric of the second Saturday of Great Lent, here on page 357.
THIRD SUNDAY OF GREAT LENT - VENERATION OF THE CROSS
Notes
1.	The service of a saint without Polyeleos we sing at Compline.
2.	The entire divine service, according to the Synod of Lviv, should be celebrated in violet vestments (according to the previous - in purple).
AT Great Vespers
1.	"Blessed is the man", as usual.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: 6 Sunday of the Octoechos and 4 of the Triodion; Glory: Triodion, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone.
3.	Sunday Aposticha; Glory, Both now: Triodion.
4.	At the end: Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the Cross, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones, in the tone of the Cross.
5.	Dismissal: "Christ our true God, Who rose from the dead, through the prayers of His most pure Mother, by the power of the precious and life-giving Cross, which we venerate today, through the intercessions of the holy, glorious and all-laudable apostles, of our venerable and God-bearing fathers and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for He is good and loves mankind".
BRINGING OUT OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS FROM
THE SACRISTY TO THE ALTAR
The bringing out of the Precious Cross from the sacristy to the altar takes place after the dismissal of Vespers, according to the rubric given for September 14, here on pp. 121-122 [→REF:p121-122].
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion to the Cross "No longer does the flaming sword guard".
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: to the Cross, Both now: Theotokion from the Sunday ones in the tone of the Cross.
2.	Everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual, only after the 50th Psalm we sing "Open to me the doors" and the rest.
3.	Canons 3 [making] 14: Octoechos Sunday with heirmos on 4, Theotokos on 2 and Triodion on 8. Katavasia of the Triodion.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Cross; after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the Cross; after the 9th - Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: of the Cross, Both now: Theotokion of the Cross.
4.	Stichera of the Praises - 9: 4 Sunday of the Octoechos and 5 of the Triodion, of which the three last - with the verses of the Cross; Glory: once more the last sticheron of the Triodion, Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
5.	During the Great Doxology the bringing out of the Precious Cross from the altar to the tetrapod takes place, according to the rubric given here on pp. 122-123 [→REF:p122-123]; then veneration, immediately after the singing of the troparion "Today is salvation", for then the Priest begins to sing the troparion "Before Thy Cross" (3) and there will be veneration in such a way as given here on pp. 124-127 [→REF:p124-127].
6.	After the dismissal - Glory, Both now: Gospel Sticheron.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the Cross. Kontakion - only of the Cross.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Troparion Sunday and of the Cross; Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the Cross.
2.	Instead of the Trisagion we sing "Before Thy Cross".
3.	Everything else - only of the Cross.
Note on the Veneration of the Precious Cross
After the dismissal of the Liturgy, and also after the end of every service celebrated in church, from this day until the end of the 6th Hour of the following Friday, veneration of the Precious Cross takes place: the Priest, having come before the tetrapod, sings together with the people "Before Thy Cross we bow down" (3). If there be a sufficient number of people, the Choir sings the stichera of veneration until all have venerated, according to the rubric given on page 127, in the note[^549].

Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday
of the fourth week of Great Lent
Everything - according to the general Lenten rubric of the previous weeks, except the veneration of the Precious Cross, according to the previously stated. Only Wednesday and Friday differ from the other three days in that at Matins, instead of the Canon of the Menaion, they have the Cross Canon of the Triodion. Also at Vespers on Tuesday for Wednesday all 6 stichera on "Lord, I have cried" will be of the Cross; and the Canon of the Menaion on these two days we take at Compline.
FOURTH SATURDAY OF GREAT LENT
Everything - according to the rubric of the second Saturday of Great Lent, here on page 357.
FOURTH SUNDAY OF GREAT LENT
Everything - according to the rubric of the second Sunday of Great Lent, here on page 360.
Note
The service of St. John of the Ladder, which some later [typika] prescribed to sing on this Sunday, is usually not taken among us. And if someone, namely in monasteries, wishes to sing it, let him sing it instead of the service of the regular saint of the Menaion, according to the rubric for a saint without Polyeleos on 4, and let him take the service of the regular saint at Compline. According to this Typikon, the service of St. Mary of Egypt is sung on the fifth[^550] Sunday of Lent, but if someone wishes, he may sing it instead of the service of the regular saint.

MONDAY, TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY AND FRIDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK OF GREAT LENT
Everything - according to the general Lenten rubric of past weeks.
Thursday of the fifth week of Great Lent
on which we sing the Great Canon
The service of the regular saint is transferred to another day.
ON WEDNESDAY EVENING
AT VESPERS WITH PRESANCTIFIED
Everything - according to the Lenten rubric, as usual, except the stichera on "Lord, I have cried", which are taken 28 on 29, for the first Idiomelon is repeated, also one more at "Glory" and one at "Both now".
Refrains to the first 20 stichera we take from "Lord, I have cried", beginning from "Fall into their own nets"; to the 21st and 22nd stichera we refrain two usual verses from the Aposticha of Vespers; and to the other seven - "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee".
Notes
1.	The stichera, not only the two first, but also all others, we sing in the tone of the Idiomela, for of the three types of Prosomoia given in the Triodion at the other stichera, two in our Heirmologia we do not find; and the one which is given at the stichera of St. Andrew of Crete, although it is given also in the Heirmologia, nevertheless, today we do not use. The stichera of St. Andrew of Crete, in the Greek text are given according to the order and in the sequence of the 24 letters of the Greek alphabet.
2.	If there be no Presanctified, then the Idiomelon and Martyricon stichera on "Lord, I have cried" are not taken, but are transferred with their two refrains to the Aposticha.
3.	It is not good to neglect prostrations at the stichera of St. Andrew.
4.	At the entire divine service of this day we use sacred vestments of Lenten colors, as usual.
AT COMPLINE: We sing Small, without prostrations. After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Great Canon.
Midnight Office: Without prostrations. After the 1st Trisagion - usual troparia, after the 2nd - Kontakion of the Great Canon.
AT MATINS
1.	From the beginning to the end of the Sessional Hymns of the Octoechos, given at the end of the Triodion, at the 1st Kathisma, we sing everything according to the general Lenten rubric, then Psalm 50 and immediately, having omitted the litany "Save, O God", the Great Canon[^551]. At the time of the singing of the canon the holy doors are opened and candles are lit on the holy table. Before the holy doors in cathedral churches a rug is spread, on which first the Bishop, if he be present, and then the other sacred ministers two by two, according to the rank of their dignity, at each ode make one great prostration, after the singing of each troparion of the ode of the canon. In our seminary, the seminarians make prostrations before the holy doors, and in the sanctuary, before the steps of the altar, all eight superiors make prostrations according to the rank of their dignity, one at one ode, by turn, and at the 9th Ode - all eight together, in epitrachelia.
2.	Canons two: one - the Great [Canon] of St. Andrew, of nine odes, the second - triodion, contains the 4th, 8th and 9th Odes, which also in these odes takes the first place. The odes of the nine-ode canon do not have an equal number of troparia and each of them has at the end two troparia to St. Mary of Egypt and one to St. Andrew of Crete. The triodion we sing on 10 troparia with the first heirmos, for the 2nd heirmos is not sung. Refrains to the troparia of the Great Canon are these: "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee", then "Venerable Father Andrew, pray to God for us", then "Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us". To the troparia of the triodion the refrain will be - "Holy Apostles, pray to God for us"[^552], because according to content they belong to the service of Thursday. At each troparion of the Canon of St. Andrew the rubrics prescribe three prostrations, but we make only one, however, great, and in cathedral temples the clergy makes prostrations only by turn and adapted to the nine odes of the canon. The choirs sing the canon in the middle of the church, each at a separate analogion, making at the troparia of the canon a small prostration. As Katavasia at all odes we take the heirmos of the last canon[^553].
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Triodion, after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the Triodion with the Beatitudes; after the 9th - Trinity Sessional Hymn, all this - with the usual litanies. At the 9th Ode we sing "More honorable", as the Moscow and the new Constantinopolitan Typika also have. After the Canon - "It is truly meet"[^554].
3.	Everything else, from the Praises psalms to the end of Matins, is taken according to the general Lenten rubric, only, if we do not add the 1st Hour, then after the 16 final prostrations at the prayer of St. Ephrem we recite the Trisagion with "Our Father" and "Lord, have mercy" (12), and then the Priest: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God" and dismissal.
AT THE HOURS
Everything - according to the usual Lenten rubric, however, after the Trisagion we recite at all Hours only the one Kontakion of the Canon, and the 1st Hour - without Kathisma.
AT THE TYPIKA AND AT VESPERS: Everything - according to the usual Lenten rubric.
LITURGY
According to the rubric there should be the Presanctified, however, now we do not sing it during Great Lent, with the exception of Wednesdays and Fridays. In the archcathedral church on this day only read liturgies are celebrated.

FIFTH SATURDAY OF GREAT LENT - OF THE AKATHIST[^555]
Note
The service of this feast is of the small type; it has only the Katavasia at Matins after each ode and the Great Doxology and is combined with the usual service of Lenten Saturday and with the Temple Canon at Matins. The peculiarity of this feast lies in that at its Matins the whole order of the Akathist to the Most Pure Virgin Mary is sung, the 12 ikos-Kontakia of which are divided into four quarters, the first of which is sung instead of the Sessional Hymn after the first Kathisma, the second - instead of the Sessional Hymn - after the second Kathisma, the third - after the 3rd, and the fourth - after the 6th Ode of the Canon; the initial Kontakion is sung at the beginning and at the end of each quarter, and before the last singing of it - once more the first Ikos[^556]. This Matins, according to the rubric, is sung at the 4th hour of the night, but we sing it at the usual time[^557]. The service of the regular saint, according to the rubric of the Greek Triodion, is sung at Compline.
RUBRIC
AT VESPERS WITH PRESANCTIFIED
1.	Kathisma usual.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - stichera on 10: Idiomelon of the day twice, one Martyric and of the feast on 7, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
3.	At "O Gladsome Light" - Prokimenon of the Triodion and reading, second Prokimenon of the Triodion and reading and the rest of the Presanctified.
Small Compline: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the feast only[^560].
Midnight Office - Saturday.
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the feast twice; Glory, Both now: once more.
2.	After the 1st Kathisma - Small Litany and the initial Kontakion "To the Directress" is sung by the Choir. The Priest, dressed in all sacred vestments of light color, opens the holy doors and censes everything as usual; then, having come to the altar, sings the first quarter of the ikos-Kontakia and, after its conclusion, the same choir sings once more the initial Kontakion "To the Directress". All rubrics at this singing prescribe standing; (and therefore this is called Akathist, that is non-sitting). The Choir sings the Kontakion in the middle of the church majestically and solemnly.
3.	After the 2nd Kathisma and after the 3rd and 6th Odes of the Canon, immediately after the Small Litany, the Priest sings the other three quarters of the ikos-Kontakia, and the Choir - the Kontakion "To the Directress" at the beginning and at the end of each quarter. At the beginning of each quarter the Priest censes everything just as at the beginning of the first quarter[^558].
This Akathist order is celebrated usually at the altar. In the cathedral temple it is sung at the altar of the Mother of God, which is located in its right nave; and then the Priest censes the altar and everything else, as usual, and immediately, having left the holy doors open, goes out through them to the altar of the Most Holy Theotokos and sings there the Akathist order, censing from the altar at the beginning of each quarter the icon of the Mother of God, the sacred ministers, the choirs and the people. After singing the 4th quarter of the ikos-Kontakia the Priest returns to the sanctuary, closes the holy doors and goes to the sacristy, where he takes off the sacred vestments and, having put on the epitrachelion, continues the service of Matins.
4.	Canons 2 [making] 12: Temple of the Saint with heirmos on 6 and of the feast on 6. Katavasia "I shall open my mouth" up to the 6th Ode. From the 6th Ode we do not take the Canon of the Temple, but we sing 3 canons on 14, that is of the feast on 6 and both canons of the triodion on 8 with the addition of two troparia, that is one Martyric with the refrain "Wondrous is God", and the second - for the dead, with the refrain "Their souls", and the Katavasia of the Triodion. Refrain to the troparia of the Canon of the Theotokos - the general "Most Holy Theotokos, save us", however, among us they like to refrain the acrostic of the canon "Container of Joy, to Thee alone it is fitting to rejoice". In Greek: "Vessel of joy, to Thee alone it is fitting to rejoice". Both the troparia and this refrain we sing to the melody given in the new Heirmologion on the Akathist Saturday.
After the 3rd Ode, after the last singing of the Kontakion "To the Directress", we recite the SESSIONAL HYMN of the feast; after the 6th, immediately after the Small Litany, is sung the last quarter of the ikos-Kontakia with the Kontakion "To the Directress" before the beginning and after the conclusion, however, its last Kontakion "O All-praised Mother" is sung three times, after this - the 1st Ikos and then - "To the Directress". At the 9th Ode we sing "More honorable" and after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the feast.
5.	Stichera of the Praises - 4: all - of the feast, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
6.	After the Great Doxology - Troparion of the feast.
AT THE HOURS AND AT THE LITURGY: Everything - only of the feast; only the Epistle and Gospel first - of the day, and then - of the feast.
FIFTH SUNDAY OF GREAT LENT
Everything - according to the rubric of the 2nd Sunday, here on page 360.
MONDAY, TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY, THURSDAY AND FRIDAY
OF THE SIXTH WEEK OF GREAT LENT
Everything - according to the general rubric of past weeks.

FLOWER TRIODION
PRESCRIPTIONS OF THE SYNOD OF LVIV TO PASTORS
ON DIVINE WORSHIP
FROM THE SATURDAY OF LAZARUS TO BRIGHT TUESDAY
INCLUSIVE
1.	On the Saturday before Flowery Sunday, called Lazarus [Saturday], let the Liturgy be sung in church.
2.	On Flowery Sunday let everything be celebrated as usual, according to the rubric of a feast of the Lord of the first rank with the addition of the blessing of branches at Matins.
3.	On the three following days of Great Week it is fitting to sing the Liturgy of the Presanctified.
4.	On Thursday of Passion Week it is fitting to sing the Liturgy together with Vespers.
5.	On the same day, after sunset, it is fitting to sing the Office of the "Passions" with the 12 Gospels.
6.	On Friday, which we mark as a solemn feast, let the Hours be celebrated in the morning in church, called Royal, and about noon - Vespers with the bringing out of the Shroud[^559], which, when it is brought out, is placed before the iconostasis in the so-called tomb, and there let it remain for constant veneration by the people until Resurrection Matins.
7.	It would be very desirable that the pastors on the same day, after the placing of the Shroud, preach to the people at a convenient time a word on the passion and death of Christ.
8.	It is also entrusted to the same pastors to celebrate on this Friday, after sunset, Tomb Matins in church, in view of the divine service of this day and in view of the solemn rites celebrated at its end.
9.	On Great Saturday itself it is fitting to sing the Liturgy of St. Basil with Vespers.
10.	On the Sunday of the Resurrection[^650][^649][^640] very early it is fitting to sing Matins with all the rites that precede and accompany it, according to the rubric approved by this Synod. In cathedral churches, similarly as in non-cathedral ones, this Matins is usually anticipated and celebrated on Saturday evening; the Synod considers that such a custom may be adhered to.
11.	On the first three days of Bright Week it is fitting daily to sing Matins, Liturgy and Vespers in church.
12.	The Synod forbids all priests read liturgies throughout the whole Passion Week, and on the first three days of this week prescribes only the Liturgy of the Presanctified; on Great Thursday [^576]and Saturday - only the sung Liturgy, that is of St. Basil the Great with Vespers (Title IV, Chapter I. 3. 5). On Great Friday, with the exception of the feast of the Annunciation, the Liturgy should not be celebrated.
Note
From this Saturday to the Sunday of Ap. Thomas inclusive only the Triodion is sung, and the Menaion - only if the Annunciation falls, and from Bright Monday to the Sunday of Ap. Thomas inclusive, if a saint with Vigil or Polyeleos falls. The Canons of saints without Polyeleos of these 16 days are prescribed for Compline, beginning from Monday of the 2nd week of Great Lent, as was noted above, on page 357.

SIXTH SATURDAY OF GREAT LENT - OF LAZARUS
Note
The service of this feast is of the small type and only at Matins, from the Canon onwards, - great. However, also before the Canon it has some parts of the Sunday service, namely after the 2nd Kathisma, that is "The Blameless", it has "The Choir of angels", after the 2nd Sessional Hymn it has "The Resurrection of Christ" and before the Exaposteilarion - "Holy is the Lord our God" three times.
RUBRIC
On Friday evening
AT VESPERS WITH PRESANCTIFIED
1.	Kathisma proper.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: Idiomelon of the day twice, Martyricon once, then 7 of the feast, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
3.	At "O Gladsome Light" - Prokimenon of the Triodion and one reading of the Triodion, then 2nd Prokimenon, 2nd reading of the Triodion and everything else of the Presanctified.
AT Small Compline
We sing the Canon of Lazarus in the Triodion, after the Canon, instead of "It is truly meet", - Heirmos of the 9th Ode of the Canon. After the Trisagion - Kontakion of the feast only.
AT THE Midnight Office
After the 1st Trisagion, instead of the troparia "Uncreated Nature", we read the Troparion of Lazarus; after the 2nd Trisagion, instead of the troparia "Remember, O Lord", - Kontakion of Lazarus, and the prayer "Remember" we do not say.
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the feast twice, Glory, Both now: the same.
2.	After the 1st and 2nd Kathismata - Sessional Hymn of the feast, however, after the 2nd Kathisma, before the Sessional Hymn, we sing "The Choir of angels" exactly as on Sunday; and after the Sessional Hymn - "The Resurrection of Christ", Psalm 50 and immediately Canon.
3.	Canons of the feast - two: 1st - with heirmos on 8 and 2nd - on 6. From the 6th Ode - tetraodion, heirmos - twice, troparia - on 6, then the other canon on 6. Katavasia after each ode - Heirmos of the 2nd Canon. Refrain to the troparia - "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee". After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn, after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos of the feast; at the 9th we do not sing "More honorable"[^646][^606][^579]; after the 9th we do not say "It is truly meet" until the Sunday of Ap. Thomas; after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the feast, however, before the Exaposteilarion we sing "Holy is the Lord our God" three times.
4.	Stichera of the Praises - 8: all - of the feast, with two Sunday verses, as every Sunday; Glory: of the feast, Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
5.	After the Great Doxology - Troparion of the feast only.
6.	Dismissal specific.
AT THE HOURS AND AT THE LITURGY: Everything - only of the feast, and at the Liturgy, instead of the Trisagion, we sing "All Who have been baptized into Christ".
FLOWER SUNDAY
[^562]Everything - according to the general rubric of a feast of the Lord with All-Night Vigil without Litiya. It has everything proper to itself, and at the Liturgy - Antiphons and Entrance Hymn. However, before the Troparion of Flowery [Sunday] we sing yesterday's Troparion of Lazarus; only after the Great Doxology we sing the Troparion of Lazarus alone.
AT Great Vespers: On "Lord, I have cried" - stichera on 10; and at the blessing of loaves - Troparion of Lazarus twice and of Flowery [Sunday] - once.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of Lazarus twice, Glory, Both now: of Flowery [Sunday].
2.	The blessing and distribution of branches takes place, according to the rubric, immediately after the 50th Psalm, during the kissing of the Gospel. According to our custom, the blessing takes place after the 50th Psalm, and the distribution - during the anointing with oil (myrovanie), that is during the canon. And it takes place thus: When the Priest has sung the Gospel, he places it on the analogion near the tetrapod, between two candles lit on candlesticks. On the tetrapod are placed branches and prepared censers and sprinklers. The Priest approaches the tetrapod and at the time when the Choir reads the 50th Psalm, having put incense in and blessed the censer, censes the branches from the four sides of the tetrapod and, after the conclusion of the 50th Psalm, when the Deacon exclaims (if there be none, then the Priest himself) "Let us pray to the Lord", reads aloud (from the Sluzhebnik (lit. "Service Book") or from the Triodion[^563] ) the first prayer "O Lord our God", and the Choir responds: "Amen". Priest: "Peace be to all"; deacon: "Bow your heads unto the Lord"; and, after "To Thee, O Lord", the Priest reads the second prayer "O Lord God Almighty... unto ages of ages"[^564]; choir: "Amen"; the Priest sprinkles the branches with holy water, saying: "These branches are blessed and sanctified" and the rest; and, after singing the litany "Save, O God", with His right hand anoints the people, and with His left hand distributes to all the branches, which the Deacon solemnly hands to him, and if there be no deacon, then one of the church servers[^565].
After the 9th Ode we do not read the Exaposteilarion, but immediately: "Holy is the Lord our God" (3) in Tone 4.
AT THE LITURGY: After the Entrance - Troparion of Lazarus, Glory: of FLOWERY [SUNDAY], Both now: Kontakion of FLOWERY [SUNDAY]. We sing the Trisagion.
FAST FOR THE WHOLE PASSION WEEK
On Monday, Wednesday and Friday the Synod of Lviv prescribes a strict fast. On Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday it permits also dairy products (Title XI, part 4).
GREAT MONDAY, TUESDAY AND WEDNESDAY
Notes
1.	The sacred vestments of these days and of the whole Passion Week, beginning from Flowery Sunday evening, should be of violet color.
2.	All these three days have one form of divine service, that is Lenten, as in the Forty Days [Lent], only with certain exceptions, as given below:
AT VESPERS
a) On Flowery Sunday evening
1.	On "Lord, I have cried" - stichera of the Triodion on 6, Glory: Triodion, Both now: Triodion.
2.	Entrance, Prokimenon of the day ("Bless the Lord now") and immediately "Vouchsafe, O Lord".
3.	Aposticha of the Triodion with specific verses.
4.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" with the Trisagion - Troparion "Virgin Theotokos" and everything else with prostrations, as on the previous Sundays of Great Lent.
5.	Dismissal specific, so also on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday at the end of the Hours: "Christ the Lord, Who goes"[^567].
b) On Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday evening
AT VESPERS WITH PRESANCTIFIED
1.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: all - of the Triodion, Glory, Both now: Triodion.
2.	Entrance with the Gospel and, after "O Gladsome Light", - two Prokimena of the Triodion, each - with its reading.
3.	After "Let my prayer be set forth" the Priest: "And that we may be accounted worthy" and the rest and reads the Gospel of Matthew, Section 98 and the rest of the Presanctified with the dismissal "Christ the Lord, Who goes".
Note: If there be no Presanctified, then on "Lord, I have cried" we sing stichera on 6, and the three last we transfer to the Aposticha with the usual verses, singing the first twice. We make the Entrance with the Gospel and, after the second reading of the Triodion, we sing the Gospel, as above, and everything else with prostrations, according to the Lenten custom.
AT COMPLINE
On Sunday evening we sing Small Compline, according to the rubric of other Sundays of Great Lent, and at it - the triodion of the Triodion, and after the Trisagion - Kontakion of the Triodion only.
On Monday and Tuesday evening - Great Compline with prostrations according to the Lenten rubric, and at it also - the triodion of the Triodion and after the Trisagion - Kontakion of the Triodion, then "O Lord of Hosts, be with us"[^568].
On Wednesday evening we sing Small Compline[^569], also at it - the triodion of the Triodion and, after the Trisagion, - Kontakion of the Triodion only.
AT THE Midnight Office: Nothing special.
AT MATINS
1.	At Alleluia, instead of the Trinity Hymns, we sing the Troparion "Behold the Bridegroom" twice, Glory, Both now: the same.
2.	Three regular Kathismata with their Sessional Hymns, then "And that we may be accounted worthy", Gospel of Matins[^570], according to the sequence of Gospels, Psalm 50 and "Save, O God"[^571].
3.	Canon only one: triodion on Monday and Wednesday, or diodion [two-ode canon] on Tuesday. Troparia - on 12, heirmoi - twice. We do not recite the [Biblical] Odes, but only the refrain to the troparia of the canon "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee", then the Katavasia, heirmos of the canon once both choirs together. Before the Kontakion-Ikos the Priest sings the Small Litany; at the 9th Ode we do not sing "More honorable", nor "It is truly meet" after the canon, but immediately after the Katavasia - Small Litany and Exaposteilarion "Thy bridal chamber" twice, Glory, Both now: three times the same.
4.	Stichera of the Praises - 4: of the Triodion, Glory, Both now: Triodion, Small Doxology and, after "Let us complete", - Aposticha of the Triodion and everything else with prostrations, as on the Lenten days of Great Lent.
AT THE HOURS
Everything - according to the general Lenten rubric of Great Lent, only:
1.	At the 1st and 9th Hours there will be no Kathisma, but it will be only at the 3rd and 6th.
2.	Immediately after the Theotokion "O Theotokos, Thou Art the vine" at the 3rd Hour and, after the corresponding Theotokia, at the other two Hours, the rubrics prescribe the reading of the Four Gospels, which today among us is read only in cathedral, or conciliar, churches[^573]. At the 6th Hour we read the Gospel not immediately after the Theotokion, but after the conclusion of the Troparion of the Prophecy and the Paremia with its Prokimena. The reading of the Four Gospels covers all the Evangelists, that is Matthew, Mark and Luke in full, and John - only up to the "Passion of Christ", that is up to "Now is the Son of man glorified", Section 46, verse 13.32. All the Evangelists, taken together, are divided into 9 readings, according to the number of the three Hours (3, 6, 9) and three days (Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday). Matthew is divided into 2 readings, Mark - into 2, John - into 2, and Luke - into 3. The first reading covers the first half of Matthew, the second - the second half of Matthew, the third - the first half of Mark, the fourth - the second half of Mark, the fifth - the first part of Luke, the sixth - the second part of Luke, the seventh - the third part of Luke, the eighth - the first half of John, the ninth - the second half of John. The rubric does not indicate where the first half of the three Evangelists and the first and second parts of Luke end. But since Matthew has 28 chapters, its half ends with the 14th chapter, Mark - 16 chapters, so its half ends with the 8th chapter, Luke - 24 chapters, so its first part ends with the 8th chapter, and the second - with the 16th. John, up to "Now is [the Son of man] glorified", has 12 chapters and part of the 13th chapter, therefore its half ends with the 6th chapter and part of the 7th.
The Priest, at the beginning of each reading, dressed in a phelonion of Lenten color, opens the holy doors and censes everything as usual, then, having come out through the holy doors to the analogion placed before the holy doors facing the people, on which stand two candlesticks with lit candles, reads from there the Gospel, beginning from "And that we may be accounted worthy". After the conclusion of each reading, having kissed the beginning of the reading and leaving the Gospel on the analogion until the end of the 3rd reading, he returns to the sanctuary and, having closed the holy doors, takes off the phelonion[^574].
3.	After the Trisagion - Kontakion of the Triodion.
AT THE TYPIKA
1.	Only one Kontakion of the Triodion.
2.	In Slavonic rubrics and the Greek Typikon of Sabbas, on Great Wednesday, instead of the dismissal the prayer "O Master most merciful" is given, which is at Vespers with All-Night Vigil, and in Slavonic ones - also the prayer of forgiveness for sins committed in Great Lent, and commemorations. However, these superfluous additions of the Greco-Slavs are unknown to the Greeks. The prayer "O Master most merciful" and the forgiveness may be retained perhaps only in monasteries. The commemorations, which are superfluous here, will be taken later, at the end of Compline and the Midnight Office, which have nothing in common with forgiveness for the sins of the Forty Days.
On Wednesday
AT VESPERS WITH PRESANCTIFIED,
AT COMPLINE AND AT THE Midnight Office
Everything - according to the rubric of Monday and Tuesday, here on pp. 379-380 [→REF:p379-380], only on Wednesday, after the dismissal of the Liturgy of the Presanctified, the prostrations in church cease, and in the cells are made until the ringing for Matins of the bright Resurrection of Christ[^575]. We, however, until the Resurrection of Christ make three great prostrations in church, at the end of the Divine Service, singing the verse "Though Thou didst suffer", and during the veneration of the Shroud, singing "The noble Joseph".

GREAT THURSDAY
AT MATINS
1.	"Blessed is our God", "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee", "O Heavenly King" and everything else, as usual, with the Two Psalms and with the Six Psalms up to the end of the litany "In peace let us pray to the Lord".
2.	Instead of "God is the Lord" we sing Alleluia in Tone 8, that is in the tone of the following troparion; but since this troparion has a specific melody in the Heirmologion, we sing Alleluia according to the pattern of its melody.
3.	Troparion "When the glorious disciples" twice, Glory, Both now: once more the same.
4.	There will be no Kathismata and Sessional Hymns, but immediately the Gospel from Luke, Section 108 and 1st verse of Section 109, that is the 39th verse of the 22nd chapter[^577]; then Psalm 50 and, leaving out "Save, O God", we sing immediately the Canon.
5.	Canon only one: heirmoi - twice, troparia - on 6[^578] with the refrain "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee". Katavasia after each ode - heirmos of the same canon once, both choirs together. After the 3rd Ode we recite the Sessional Hymn, after the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos, at the 9th we do not sing "More honorable", nor after the 9th - "It is truly meet", but instead of this, - the heirmos of the canon[^580] and immediately the Exaposteilarion twice, Glory, Both now: the same.
6.	Stichera of the Praises - 4 and, after the Small Doxology, - "Let us complete" and Aposticha with specific verses.
7.	"It is a good thing" once, Trisagion with "Our Father" and Troparion "When the glorious disciples", without Theotokion.
8.	Priest: "Wisdom"; Choir: "Bless".
Priest: "Blessed be He... ages"; Choir: "Amen"; and 1st Hour.
AT THE HOURS
1.	At all: Troparion and Kontakion of Great Thursday, however, at the 1st Hour, after the Theotokion "What shall we call Thee", we read the Troparion of the Prophecy, Prokimenon, Paremia and 2nd Prokimenon.
2.	The Dismissal "Christ the Lord, Who goes"[^581] we recite at the 1st Hour, and at the others, since they are sung together with the Typika, we recite this dismissal at the end of the Typika. All this we recite in our cells.
AT THE TYPIKA
1.	Begins from the Beatitudes, without stichera. The Creed may be omitted, since it will be at the Liturgy.
2.	Instead of the usual Kontakia we recite the Kontakion of Great Thursday.
3.	After the Kontakion - "Lord, have mercy" (40), "O All-holy Trinity"[^582] and dismissal.
Great Thursday evening
AT VESPERS WITH THE LITURGY OF ST. BASIL[^583]
Note
"It is fitting for the Priest on Great Thursday at the Liturgy to consecrate two Lambs, in order to consume one at Communion, and to place the other in the artophorion and keep in the tabernacle in the usual place until today (Friday)". Thus in our Sluzhebnik[^584]. Regarding the Lamb itself, which is to be kept in the tabernacle until the day of exposition, the Synod of Lviv orders that "it before consecration be fitted to its vessel, the so-called Melchizedek, into which it is well inserted and carefully wiped, so that afterwards crumbs do not fall from it; so that placed in such a way in the Melchizedek, it be consecrated at the Liturgy of one of the preceding days and kept in the tabernacle until the exposition itself". When the Priest prepares the Lamb at the Proskomedia, wishing to use it for exposition, he does not say over it the words "In remembrance of the Lord" etc., nor does He perform over it the sacred actions which are usually performed over the Lamb that is to be consumed at the same Divine Service, for it is considered only communicative; it is enough only to cut it, so that it would be convenient to break and consume it on another day.
RUBRIC
1.	From the beginning to "Lord, I have cried" everything - according to the rubric of the Eve of the Nativity of Christ, here on pp. 169-170 [→REF:p169-170].
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - stichera on 10.
3.	Entrance with the Gospel and 3 readings of the Triodion, the two first - with their Prokimena, and the third - without Prokimenon. The Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion is not taken.
4.	Immediately after the 3rd reading - Small Litany with the exclamation of the Trisagion, Trisagion, Prokimenon of the Triodion, Epistle and Gospel and, according to the order, Liturgy of Basil the Great.
5.	Instead of the Cherubic Hymn, also after the transfer of the Holy Gifts, instead of the Communion Hymn and "Let our mouths be filled", we sing the Troparion "Of Thy Mystical Supper". So in general editions. In our Manuscript Typikon, our Sluzhebnyky (lit. "Service Books") and the Moscow Typikon, instead of "In Thee rejoiceth", is prescribed the Heirmos of the 9th Ode of the Canon ("Come, let us the faithful"). The Euchologion of Benedict gives "Of Thy Mystical Supper" only instead of "In Thee rejoiceth". (In the order of the Liturgy of Basil).
AT Small Compline: Triodion of the Triodion and, after the Trisagion, - Kontakion of Great Friday only.
AT THE DAILY Midnight Office: Everything - as usual, in the cells.

GREAT FRIDAY
AT MATINS
THE SERVICE OF THE HOLY AND SAVING PASSION
OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST
Notes
1.	We sing this Matins after sunset; according to the rubric - at the 2nd hour of the night.
2.	Before the holy doors is placed an analogion with two candlesticks, facing the people, and on it - the Gospel.
GENERAL OVERVIEW
From the usual beginning to the end of the troparion after "Alleluia" and from the Canon to the end of Matins everything - according to the rubric of Matins of Great Thursday, here on pp. 383-384 [→REF:p383-384]. Between the troparion and the canon there will be five Sessional Hymns, each of which has before it three antiphons of the Passion troparia, without Kathismata and small litanies, then the Beatitudes, Prokimenon and Psalm 50. Besides this we read 12 Passion Gospels: the first - after the troparion, the five following - after each of the five Sessional Hymns, the seventh - after the Beatitudes, the eighth - after the 50th Psalm, the ninth - after the Exaposteilarion, the tenth - after the Praises, the eleventh - after "Let us complete", the twelfth - after the Aposticha. After the singing of each Gospel we ring all the church bells and, after the twelfth Gospel, we do not ring until the Resurrection itself, but instead of bells we use wooden clappers. But it is better already at Passion Matins not to ring, but to strike clappers or boards, for Passion Matins is a time of sorrow, to which the joyful sounds of bells do not correspond. Also in Rome already at Passion Matins clappers are used.
DETAILED RUBRIC
1.	From the usual beginning to the end of the litany "In peace let us pray to the Lord" everything - as at Matins daily[^585].
2.	Instead of "God is the Lord" we sing Alleluia in the tone of the following troparion.
3.	Troparion "When the glorious disciples" twice, Glory, Both now: once more the same.
4.	When the troparion is sung the third time, the Priest vests in a violet phelonion, goes before the steps of the altar, bows to the Holy Mysteries and, having opened the holy doors, recites the prayer of the censer, after which, having blessed the censer: "Blessed is our God", censes around the holy table, then, having stood before the steps of the altar and bowed low, goes out through the holy doors before the iconostasis and censes the local icons, the choirs and the people and, having returned through the holy doors to the sanctuary, gives up the censer and, having again bowed low, sings the Small Litany without exclamation, then goes out through the holy doors to the analogion and exclaims: "And that we may be accounted worthy", "Peace be to all", "Wisdom, Aright" and the rest. The Choir, instead of "Glory to Thee, O Lord", sings "Glory to Thy Passion, O Lord"[^586]. Priest: "Let us attend" and reads the first Gospel. After the conclusion of the reading the Choir, instead of "Glory to Thee, O Lord", sings: "Glory to Thy long-suffering, O Lord"[^587]. The Priest, having kissed the beginning of the reading, returns to the sanctuary and, having closed the holy doors and bowed low to the Holy Mysteries, goes to the sacristy, takes off the phelonion and goes to his place.
All this - exactly so at the readings of the other Gospels, with the exception of the litany and censing, which according to the rubric of our Triodia and the Typikon of the Lviv University, will be only at the 1st Gospel and at the five Sessional Hymns, and the censing - only of the holy table. They give thus: "We do not sit at these Sessional Hymns, since the Priest censes the holy table, but we sing them standing"[^588]. Finally we consider that it is fitting to cense not only at the Sessional Hymns, but also at all other Gospels, for the censing takes place not for the sake of the Sessional Hymns, but for the sake of the Gospels, however, only the holy table (around), as our Triodia have, which mention the censing only of the holy table. Everything should be censed only twice, that is at the 1st Gospel and at the Canon, at the heirmos of the 9th Ode.
According to Slavonic rubrics the Abbot or Superior should sing the first Gospel, and according to others also the twelfth. In the cathedral temple the Bishop reads them, others - the sacred ministers, according to the rank of their dignity[^589].
If there be deacons, they remain from the beginning of Matins, dressed in dalmatic with orarion of violet color, in the sanctuary, at their places, until they begin to sing the third time the troparion "When the glorious disciples"; then they come out together with the Priest who will sing the Gospel, dressed in a violet phelonion, before the steps of the altar and, having bowed together with him to the Holy Mysteries, open the holy doors, cense everything as usual, as at the beginning of the Liturgy, return before the steps of the altar and, having given up the censers and bowed both together to the Holy Mysteries, go out, each through his door, before the holy doors and, again having bowed to the Holy Mysteries, stand there until the second deacon after the singing of the troparion sings the Small Litany; then, having bowed to the Holy Mysteries and having exchanged their places, they proceed to the analogion so that, when the Priest approaches the analogion, the first Deacon is on the right, and the second - on the left of him. When the Priest, having bowed to the Holy Mysteries, comes out through the holy doors to the analogion, the first Deacon exclaims: "And that we may be accounted worthy". Priest: "Peace be to all". Second deacon: "Wisdom, Aright. Let us listen". Priest: "The Reading from (Name)". First deacon: "Let us attend". Priest - reading. After the conclusion of the reading, the Priest kisses the beginning of the reading first himself, afterwards the Deacon who is on the right kisses [it], and after him the one who is on the left. All three return to the sanctuary: the Priest - through the central, and the deacons - through the side doors, stand together with the Priest before the steps of the altar and, having closed the holy doors and bowed all together to the Holy Mysteries, go to their places. At the other Gospels, since there will be no Small Litany, the deacons, having come out before the holy doors, bow and, having exchanged places, proceed to the analogion and, when the Priest stands between them, exclaim: "And that we may be accounted worthy" and the rest, as above.
If the Bishop or other sacred ministers be present, the deacons should cense them before the choirs and neither the Priest nor the deacons kiss the Gospel before the Bishop and sacred ministers. And therefore both deacons together carry the open Gospel to the Bishop and sacred ministers to kiss, then to the Priest standing in the holy doors, and when he kisses it, then they also kiss [it] and place [it] on the analogion; then, having bowed low to the Holy Mysteries, return, each through his door, to the sanctuary.
5.	After the singing of the first Gospel follow five Sessional Hymns, each of which has before it three antiphons of the Passion troparia, and after itself - one Passion Gospel. The number of troparia in all antiphons is not the same and therefore, according to the rubric, each must be repeated[^590], except the Theotokion, with which each antiphon concludes, with the refrain "Glory, Both now"[^591].
6.	The Beatitudes, with the Prokimenon and the 6th Gospel at the end. The number of stichera on the Beatitudes - 7, and with "Glory, Both now" - 9[^592].
7.	Psalm 50 and the eighth Gospel.
8.	Canon - triodion, heirmoi - twice, troparia - on 12, Katavasia after each ode - its heirmos, both choirs together. After the 5th Ode - Small Litany and Kontakion-Ikos; at the 9th Ode we do not sing "More honorable", but only the heirmos "More honorable"[^593]; after the 9th we do not sing "It is truly meet", but we sing the Katavasia[^594]; then - Small Litany and three times the Exaposteilarion with the refrain "Glory, Both now", as usual, then - the ninth Gospel.
9.	Stichera of the Praises on 4, Glory: one sticheron, Both now: another, then - the tenth Gospel.
10.	"To Thee belongs glory"[^595], "Glory to Thee Who Hast shown us the light" and the Small Doxology.
11.	Litany "Let us complete" and, after the exclamation "For Thou Art a merciful [God]"[^596], immediately - the eleventh Gospel.
12.	Aposticha and the twelfth Gospel.
13.	"It is a good thing", Trisagion, "Our Father", Troparion of Friday "Thou Hast redeemed".
14.	Litany "Have mercy on us, O God" and the specific dismissal of Great Friday, intermediate, that is Priest: "Wisdom", Choir: "More honorable"; Priest: "Glory to Thee, O Christ" and the rest, as usual[^597]. We do not combine with the 1st Hour.
ERECTION OF THE TOMB OF GOD
On Friday morning, before the beginning of the Royal Hours, the Shroud and the most beautiful Book of the Holy Gospels is placed on the holy table. Before the holy doors is placed the Tomb of God, at which, according to the custom of the northern and western Latin churches[^598], the Holy Mysteries are exposed until the Resurrection of Christ itself. Our Sluzhebnyky prescribe placing on this Tomb the Artophorion with the Holy Mysteries. According to the custom of our archcathedral temple, the Holy Mysteries are exposed in a monstrance on the main altar. And the Tomb of God should be erected so that above it rises a cross without the Crucified One, with a cloth hung on its crossbar and with the instruments of Christ's passion, it should be decorated with costly carpets, surrounded by many candlesticks and lamps and vessels with small trees and flowers. The front board of the sarcophagus is covered with red damask, to which a cloth is attached, and to it afterwards the Shroud will be attached. The board itself should not lie horizontally, but slanted so that the Shroud attached to it would be visible and accessible for veneration.
ROYAL HOURS
In the archcathedral church they are sung at 10 o'clock in the morning, together with the Typika and with Vespers[^599]. We sing everything according to the rubric of the Royal Hours of the Eve of the Nativity of Christ. However, since the Tomb of God is placed before the holy doors, the analogion of the Gospel is placed a little further from it, the analogia of other readings - further from it. And everything that on the Eve of the Nativity of Christ the sacred ministers recite before the holy doors, they now recite before the Tomb, but they do not cense the Tomb, since there is nothing in it yet.
TYPIKA (Typika)
We join it to the 9th Hour, but we do not celebrate from the beginning, as on the Eve of the Nativity, but from the Beatitudes, without stichera, in this way:
1.	"The Beatitudes", "Glory, Both now"; "Remember us, O Lord" (3).
2.	"The Choir of heavenly hosts" with verses, Both now: "I believe".
3.	"Remit, pardon", "Our Father", Kontakion of Great Friday.
4.	"Lord, have mercy" (12); priest: "O All-holy Trinity".
5.	"Blessed be the name of the Lord" (3), "I will bless the Lord".
6.	"It is truly meet" with "More honorable than the Cherubim".
7.	Priest: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God" and dismissal of Great Friday, to the people.
Today there is no Liturgy, unless the Annunciation falls, and immediately after the Typika we begin Vespers.
On Great Friday
AT VESPERS
Notes
1.	At this Vespers there will be an Entrance with the Gospel and, at its end, at the last sticheron of the Aposticha, - the procession with the Shroud and the placing of it in the Tomb[^600].
2.	All actions that the sacred ministers at usual Vespers perform before the iconostasis, at this Vespers they perform before the Tomb of God.
RUBRIC
1.	From the usual beginning to "Lord, I have cried" everything - as at Daily Vespers, without Kathisma.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - stichera on 6, Glory: one sticheron, Both now: another. Entrance with the Gospel.
3.	Instead of the Prokimenon of the day there will be Prokimenon of the Triodion, Paremia and third Paremia; then - third Prokimenon of the Apostle, Apostle, "Alleluia" and Gospel. At "Alleluia" there will be censing. "Let us attend. Peace be to all. Wisdom, let us attend" we exclaim only at the 1st and 3rd Prokimena. We begin the Gospel from "Wisdom, Aright". Instead of "Glory to Thee, O Lord" before the Gospel will be "Glory to Thy Passion, O Lord", and after the Gospel - "Glory to Thy long-suffering, O Lord", exactly so as at Matins.
4.	"Let us all say", "Vouchsafe", "Let us complete" and Aposticha.
5.	At the last sticheron of the Aposticha, that is at "Thee, Who Art clothed with light", takes place the procession with the Shroud and the placing of it in the Tomb. According to the custom of our cathedral churches this takes place in the following way: During the singing of the Aposticha the procession is formed in the church. On the altar, on the left side, stands the monstrance, candles are lit on the altar and at the Tomb.
The sacred ministers, the Bishop and the four most worthy canons, who will carry the Shroud, vest in all sacred vestments of their rank, and the other canons and priests - only in epitrachelia and phelonia, some - only in epitrachelia, and two deacons - in all diaconal [vestments]. Lit candles are distributed to the canons and other priests in the sanctuary, and to the brotherhood - in the church. The sacred ministers approach the steps of the altar and bow low. The Bishop ascends to the altar, takes the Shroud, spread on the altar, and gives it to the four canons so that each holds it by one corner. Then the Deacon who is on the right ascends to the altar and, having bowed low, unlocks the artophorion, takes from there the pyx with the Holy Mysteries, places [it] on the (folded) antimension, takes from there the Lamb with the stand into which it is inserted, not touching it with his fingers, but holding by the stand, places [it] into the monstrance and locks it well. Having locked the pyx, he places [it] into the artophorion and, having bowed, locks it also; and places the monstrance on the antimension so that it faces the people, steps aside until the Bishop, kneeling, censes the Holy Mysteries three times, each time - with a prostration at the end, and, having taken upon himself the omophorion (aer), approaches the altar. Then the Deacon, having bowed to the Holy Mysteries, takes with both hands the monstrance and hands it to the Bishop, who before that makes a prostration. The Bishop turns to the right to the people, and when the singers begin to sing "Thee, Who Art clothed with light", goes out behind the clergy through the holy doors on the northern side of the Tomb into the church and, having entered under the canopy, surrounded by candle-bearers and preceded by two deacons who cense unceasingly, proceeds behind all to the church doors. In front goes the cross-bearer, then the banner-bearers, four girls icon-bearers, after them - the church brotherhood, the seminarians, the seminary choir, then, from the holy doors, - priests, canons, four sacred dignitaries who carry the Shroud, turned with feet to the people, and at the end - the Bishop with deacons who cense, and candle-bearers. The procession goes out of the church and turns to the right, that is to its northern side and, having gone around the church three times (or, as now they do there, - once), returns to the church. Those who carry the Shroud, and the other priests stand before the Tomb, and the Bishop with the deacons returns by the southern side of the Tomb, through the holy doors, to the sanctuary. The right deacon receives from his hands the Holy Mysteries and places [them] on the altar. The Bishop kneels and, having put aside the omophorion (Velum), censes the Holy Mysteries three times, each time bowing his head; the Deacon, having bowed, exposes the Holy Mysteries at the top of the tabernacle. Having bowed before the steps of the altar, all three depart: the Bishop through the central, the deacons - through the side doors before the Tomb. The Bishop receives the Shroud from the canons who hold it, and places [it] on the Tomb, and they fasten it to the Tomb. When the singers have finished singing "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart", the Trisagion and the rest with "Our Father", the Bishop exclaims: "For Thine is the Kingdom" and begins to sing with the servers the troparion "The noble Joseph"; at the end he makes with the servers a low bow, and all the people - a great prostration to the ground. Then the second time the same troparion - the second choir, and all - a prostration, as before. And where there will be only one choir, the first time the troparion is sung by the sacred ministers, the second time - by the Choir, the third time the half - by the sacred ministers, and from "wrapped [it]" and further - by the Choir[^601]. After the singing of the troparion and after the prostrations all kiss the Shroud, according to the order, having made before the kissing one prostration: first the Bishop, and after him - all other sacred ministers, according to the rank of their dignity. After this there will be the Great Dismissal, specific to this Saturday, after which the sacred ministers return to the sanctuary, leaving the holy doors open until the end of Bright Week, take off the sacred vestments and go out, and the people kiss the Shroud[^602].
Notes
1.	Where there will be only one priest, let him choose for himself four most honorable laymen to carry the Shroud.
2.	If the pastor has several churches, then in the mother [church] He sings Vespers with the bringing out of the Shroud, and in the filial ones - only brings out the Shroud thus: after "Blessed is our God" and "O come, let us worship" (3) immediately - procession with "Thee, Who Art clothed with light" and, after the procession, - "Glory to Thee, O Christ God", dismissal and "The noble Joseph" (3) with prostrations.
Small Compline
This Compline, as also the Midnight Office, we read in private. At Compline - the Canon on the Crucifixion of the Lord and on the Lamentation of the Most Holy Theotokos.
After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of Great Saturday.
SATURDAY Midnight Office: Everything - as usual.
MATINS OF GREAT SATURDAY
Notes
1.	This Matins we sing usually on Friday evening, after sunset, although the rubrics prescribe it at the 7th hour of the night.
2.	The sacred ministers remain during Matins before the Tomb of God, where seats and a table with candlesticks and books are prepared for them. Sitting, they sing Matins from there: the priests - in epitrachelia and phelonia, and the deacons - in dalmatics of violet color.
RUBRIC
1.	From "Blessed is our God" to "O come, let us worship" exclusively everything - as usual at Matins; then after "Lord, have mercy" (12), without "O come, let us worship" the Priest immediately: "Glory to the Holy" and the Six Psalms up to "God is the Lord", as usual[^603].
2.	On "God is the Lord" - Troparion "The noble Joseph" (2), Glory: "When Thou didst descend", Both now: "The angel stood by the tomb"[^604].
3.	17th Kathisma ("The Blameless") in three stations with the Encomia (Praises), with censing at the beginning of each station and a Small Litany after each station.
Regarding the censing, we suppose that it is sufficient to cense only the Shroud (together with the Holy Mysteries, if they be exposed on the tomb), the choirs and the people[^605].
About the Encomia (Praises), in Greek Triodia called Engkomia (praise), let it be known that before each of them one verse of the Kathisma is sung, until all are finished; only the first troparion of each station (in the editions of Pochaiv Triodia also the second troparion of the second station) is sung without a verse both at the beginning and at the end of each station, with the exception of the third, after which the first troparion is not sung and the Small Litany is not recited, but immediately - "The Choir of angels" and, after the singing of it, - Small Litany.
4.	After "The Choir of angels" with the Small Litany - Sessional Hymn, 50th Psalm and Canon.
5.	Canon: heirmoi - twice, troparia - on 12. Refrain - "Glory to Thee, O Lord, for Thy holy burial". Katavasia, heirmos of the canon, - both choirs together.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn, after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos, at the 9th we do not sing "More honorable" and after the 9th we do not recite "It is truly meet", but the heirmos; and afterwards, instead of the Exaposteilarion, we sing "Holy is the Lord our God" (3).
6.	4 Stichera of the Praises, then one at "Glory" and one at "Both now".
7.	At the Great Doxology we make the Entrance with the Gospel and, instead of the one troparion after the Doxology, there will be one Sticheron of the Praises (Shroud [Epitaphios]), two troparia and three readings, that is one - of the Prophecy, one - of the Apostle and one - of the Gospel.
The Entrance takes place thus: During the singing of the Stichera of the Praises the Priest and deacons, if there be any, having bowed low before the Shroud, and simultaneously also before the Holy Mysteries, go to the sacristy and vest in all sacred vestments of their rank. During the singing of the Doxastikon also the other sacred ministers, who are before the Tomb of God, dressed in phelonia, having bowed low, depart to the sanctuary and, when the Priest with the deacons comes before the steps of the altar, stand together with him on both sides and bow all together to the Holy Mysteries. After singing the Praises [Stichera] the Priest exclaims: "Glory to Thee Who Hast shown us the light", then puts incense in for the left deacon and, when the Doxology ends, approaches the altar, takes from it the Gospel, gives it to the right deacon and, preceded by candle-bearers and the Deacon with the censer, they make the Entrance just as at the Liturgy. Having stood before the Tomb of God: the right deacon - on the right, and the left - on the left of the Priest, closer to the Tomb, the other sacred ministers - on two wings, a little at a distance, await the conclusion of the Trisagion and the sticheron "Come, let us bless". After the conclusion of the singing of the sticheron the first deacon, raising the orarion in the direction of the people, exclaims: "Let us attend", the Priest, blessing the people: "Peace be to all", the second deacon, raising the orarion: "Wisdom, let us attend" and we sing the Troparion "The noble Joseph" once. The first deacon places the Gospel on the analogion facing the people, the second gives up the censer and the Troparion of the Prophecy once[^607].
Then again: "Let us attend. Peace be to all. Wisdom, let us attend", Prokimenon, Reading of the Prophecy, Second Prokimenon, Reading of the Apostle and "Alleluia", during which the deacons cense the Tomb of God, the present sacred ministers and the people. After this the first deacon: "Wisdom, Aright! Let us listen"; Priest: "The Reading from the Holy Gospel according to Matthew". Choir: "Glory to Thy Passion, O Lord". Second deacon: "Let us attend"; the Priest sings the Gospel, facing the people. After its conclusion the Choir: "Glory to Thy long-suffering, O Lord". Then the Priest, having kissed and closed the Gospel, leaves it on the analogion, and the first deacon sings the litany "Let us all say", and the second - "Let us complete our prayer" in full, as usual.
8.	After the dismissal we sing the Troparion "The noble Joseph" (3) with prostrations exactly as at Vespers. The Deacon takes the Gospel from the analogion, the sacred ministers depart to the sanctuary and take off the sacred vestments, the Deacon places the Gospel on the altar and, having bowed, departs and unvests.
AT THE HOURS
1.	At all: Troparion and Kontakion of Great Saturday.
2.	Dismissal of Matins of Great Saturday.
AT THE TYPIKA: Exactly as on Great Thursday, here on page 385; however, the Greek Triodion does not give the Typika.
On Great Saturday evening
AT VESPERS WITH THE LITURGY OF ST. BASIL
1.	According to the custom of the archcathedral church, this Vespers begins at 9 o'clock in the day[^608].
2.	On this day there will be only one Vespers, that is Great with the Liturgy of St. Basil and without All-Night Vigil, and after the Prayer behind the Ambo, or (as the rubrics prescribe) after the dismissal of the Liturgy, there will be the Blessing of Loaves, as usual at the All-Night Vigil.
3.	The form and rubric of this Vespers is the same as the Vespers on the Eve of the Nativity, here on pp. 169-171 [→REF:p169-171], without "Blessed is the man"; only here, after "O Gladsome Light", there will be no Prokimenon, but immediately 15 readings, between which there will be no troparia, and at the 6th reading all verses of the Song of Moses are read with the refrain "For gloriously has He been glorified", and at the 15th reading the verses of the Song of the Three Youths are read with the refrain "Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all for ever". Instead of "Alleluia" we sing the last verse of the 81st Psalm with its other verses, in the form of a Prokimenon[^609]. Dismissal of Matins of Saturday.
4.	Although the service of the feast usually begins at Vespers of the preceding day and therefore the whole Resurrection service should be celebrated in bright vestments, nevertheless, since the Liturgy, with which Vespers is sung, is still of the Saturday day, in the part of the verses on "Lord, I have cried" we sing about the descent of the Savior's soul into hell and therefore from the beginning of Vespers we use violet vestments, and afterwards change them after the conclusion of the Apostle, at the verses instead of "Alleluia", in order to read the Gospel already in bright vestments[^610].
5.	Throughout the whole Bright Week, beginning from the Vespers of this day, the Resurrection service is sung and, besides the stichera of the Triodion, are sung also the Resurrection stichera of the Octoechos, each day - in a different tone, that is on Sunday - in Tone 1, on Monday - in Tone 2, on Tuesday - in Tone 3, on Wednesday - in Tone 4, on Thursday - in Tone 5, on Friday - in Tone 6, on Saturday - in Tone 8, omitting Tone 7.
AT COMPLINE
In Greek and Slavonic Triodia, except ours, Compline is not given, but from the Blessing of Loaves to the Tomb Order, which is sung immediately before Resurrection Matins, the reading of the whole book of the "Acts of the Apostles" is prescribed, although among us today these "Acts" are sung perhaps only in cathedral and seminary temples; and they are sung by verses by clerics two by two, alternately.
This Compline should be Small. Finally, even our Triodion leaves the choice to read it or not, for it is written about it: "if there be". In any case, in our Triodion is given the Canon on the Burial of Christ and on the Lamentation of the Most Holy Theotokos. After the 9th Ode, instead of "It is truly meet", will be the heirmos of this ode and, after the Trisagion, - Kontakion of Great Saturday.
INSTEAD OF THE Midnight Office[^611]
Note: We sing it before the Shroud, immediately before Resurrection Matins either only in epitrachelion and phelonion, as usual in the provinces, or in all sacred vestments of violet color, as in cathedral churches.
RUBRIC
1.	From the usual beginning to "O come, let us worship" we celebrate everything, as usual at the Midnight Office; and immediately Psalm 50 and Canon.
2.	The Tomb Canon of Matins of Great Saturday "He Who in ancient times hid the pursuing tyrant beneath the waves of the sea"; according to the rubric, heirmoi - twice, and troparia - on 12 (today - with heirmos on 4), with the refrain "Glory to Thee, O Lord, for Thy holy burial", after which Katavasia and heirmos - both choirs together.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn, and after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of Great Saturday; after the 9th "It is truly meet" will not be, but only the heirmos of this ode.
3.	Trisagion and the rest with "Our Father" and Troparion "When Thou didst descend".
4.	Litany "Have mercy on us, O God", which is at the Midnight Office, and dismissal of Matins of Great Saturday[^612], beginning from "Glory to Thee, O Christ God".
5.	At the end: "The noble Joseph" (3) with prostrations, as at Matins of Great Saturday, but the Shroud is kissed only by the sacred ministers, according to rank, and the Bishop, taking the Shroud from the Tomb, hands it to four canons and thus all the sacred ministers return to the sanctuary and four canons hang the Shroud behind the holy table over the High Place[^613]. Then they depart to the sacristy, take off the violet vestments and vest in all bright sacred vestments of their rank, and at this time in the church all candles are lit.
Note on the Shroud
Regarding the time and place of the placing of the Shroud we do not find an ancient rubric, for this rite is later and different in different regions. According to the custom of our archcathedral church the Shroud remains hung behind the holy table, over the High Place, from Resurrection Matins to the Apodosis of the Resurrection inclusive, that is until Wednesday before the Ascension. According to the custom of our other churches, the Shroud, taken from the Tomb before Resurrection Matins, is placed on the holy table, where it remains during the whole Bright Week, and from the Sunday of Ap. Thomas to the Apodosis of the Resurrection - behind the holy table. According to others - it remains on the altar, the antimension with the Gospel is placed on it and the Liturgy is celebrated on it. However, it is better to place the Shroud behind the holy table, for lying on the altar, it is often significantly damaged by candles, from which wax drips on it.
Beginning of Holy Pentecost
PROCESSION WITH THE HOLY MYSTERIES AROUND THE CHURCH[^614]
After the Shroud is taken from the Tomb of God and transferred to the sanctuary, the sacred ministers, having dressed in all the brightest sacred vestments of their rank, go out before the steps of the altar and, having bowed all together low to the Holy Mysteries, bend their knees and receive lit candles; so also the brotherhood in the church. The Deacon, who is on the right (or the Priest himself, if there be no deacons) approaches the middle of the altar and, having bowed low, places the Gospel on its right side, then, having taken the Holy Mysteries from the tabernacle and placed them on the antimension, steps aside a little, and the Bishop (or main priest), having censed the Holy Mysteries three times, as usual, and having taken upon himself the omophorion, rises, ascends the steps and, having bowed, receives the Holy Mysteries, after which turns to the people and begins to sing the sticheron "Thy Resurrection, O Christ Savior". Under the joyful sound of all bells the procession around the church takes place, with everything, as was given on Great Friday at Vespers, here on page 394, except the Shroud, which now, by the decision of bl. m. Cardinal Sembratovych, should not be carried, for this does not correspond to the joy of the Resurrection; rather it is fitting to carry the icon of the Resurrection, as it is in the Triodion, at the beginning of Resurrection Matins, during the procession to the church doors. Therefore, when the main sacred minister begins to sing the sticheron "Thy Resurrection, O Christ Savior", the choirs and people take up the singing and sing it, repeating, all the time, until the procession ends, namely the circuit of the church either three times, or at least once. When the circuit ends, all enter the church; in order, however, to avoid confusion during the second procession, those carrying banners and icons remain before the church doors, and in the church prepare for the procession the cross-bearer with two candle-bearers, the brotherhood, choirs and clergy. When the sacred ministers enter the sanctuary, the main priest ascends to the altar and, having turned to the people, blesses them with the Holy Mysteries, quietly saying: "Save, O God, Thy people and bless Thine inheritance", places the Holy Mysteries on the altar, descends before the steps, bends the knees and, having taken off the omophorion, censes the Holy Mysteries three times, as usual; the Deacon, having approached the Holy Mysteries, bows low, takes them with the stand from the monstrance and places into the artophorion, and places the artophorion into the tabernacle and, having bowed, locks it. And where there will be no monstrance, the Holy Mysteries are placed in the artophorion and with it are locked in the tabernacle.
Note: This procession with the Holy Mysteries before Resurrection Matins - is a later addition of our churches, borrowed not from the Greeks and not from the Romans, but only from the Latin churches of these parts, superfluous to the majesty of our Resurrection Matins and is not given in our rubrics.

RESURRECTION MATINS
1.	PROCESSION BEFORE THE CHURCH DOORS. All people go out of the church, and after them go out also the sacred ministers. And the procession takes place thus: All sacred ministers, in all their sacred bright vestments, stand before the steps of the altar. The main sacred minister takes the cross, the Deacon - the censer, all together bow low to the Holy Mysteries and turn to the west. The main one begins to sing the sticheron "Thy Resurrection, O Christ Savior", all take up the singing of the sticheron and go out from the sanctuary to the church: the Priest - through the holy [doors], and all other sacred ministers - through the Deacon's doors; at this time all bells ring, and all go to the great church doors and, having gone out of the church, stand according to rank before the church doors, which are immediately closed[^615]. In the middle of the church is placed on the holy table first of all the icon of the Resurrection of Christ, usually on the Artos, also other holy icons, reliquaries and the book of the Holy Gospels in the most precious binding or something else of the sacred things, all this - according to the number of priests who will give them to be kissed by the people at the end of Matins. Outside, before the church doors, Matins begins in the following way[^616].
2.	BEGINNING OF MATINS. Immediately after the church doors are closed, the main priest, holding with his left hand the cross, and with his right - the censer and censing the church doors[^617], exclaims loudly: "Glory to the Holy" and the rest. The Choir responds: "Amen"; the Priest gives up the censer and sings loudly the troparion "Christ is risen", also all - the same, then the Priest the second time - the same and all - the same, and the third time the Priest - the same and all - the same, then the Priest in a high voice exclaims the verses, and all after each verse sing this troparion once[^618]. At the end the Priest, having sung in a higher voice the same troparion only up to "trampling down death by death" inclusive, opens the doors, and all finish: "and upon those in the tombs bestowing life" and again all bells ring, all enter the church[^619]. The Matins prayers at Resurrection Matins throughout the whole Bright Week are not recited, for they are connected with the Six Psalms, and since there will be no Six Psalms here, there will be no prayers. If it were necessary to recite the prayers, it should be indicated in the rubric where they should be recited, for during the verses "Let God arise", which take the place of the Six Psalms, it is not possible to recite them, for at this time the rubric orders the Priest to sing verses, and not to add prayers as well.
3.	ENTRANCE INTO THE CHURCH. The entrance of the procession into the church takes place in the reverse order to the exit from the church, that is first enters the main priest, after him - other priests and sacred ministers, all the clergy, then singers, brotherhood, banner- and icon-bearers, the cross-bearer and all people. The priests enter the sanctuary and approach the holy table. The Bishop, if there be one, departs to his throne. The Deacon stands in his place before the holy doors and sings from there the litany.
4.	After the entrance into the church the first deacon sings the Great Litany "In peace let us pray to the Lord", standing in the usual place, and immediately we sing the Canon.
5.	Canon of the Resurrection: heirmoi - 4 times (in Greek ones - twice), troparia - on 12. (Today heirmoi - once, troparia with heirmos - on 4). Katavasia after each ode - heirmos of the canon, both choirs together - once. The Priest sings the heirmoi, and the choirs - the troparia and Katavasia. Refrain to the troparia of the canon - "Christ is risen from the dead", at the penultimate - "Glory", and at the last - "Both now", as usual.
At the beginning of the canon, after the singing of the heirmos, the Priest censes everything, as usual[^620].
After each ode the deacons, from their usual places before the holy doors, sing the Small Litany with separate exclamations, which the priests sing alternately in the sanctuary[^621].
After the 3rd Ode - Hypakoe; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos and "The Resurrection of Christ" (3), "Jesus having risen from the grave" once (according to others - three times); at the 9th, after "O Theotokos and Mother of Light", the usual censing takes place and, instead of "More honorable" we sing "The angel cried" and "Shine, shine"; after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the Resurrection three times.
6.	Stichera of the Praises - 8: 4 Sunday of the Octoechos of Tone 1, with the usual verses from "Praise Him", and 4 of the Resurrection with specific verses, then Glory, Both now: to the Resurrection, "Christ is risen" (3), can be more, until the kissing is finished.
7.	KISSING ONE ANOTHER. Is prescribed in the rubrics at "Christ is risen", after the conclusion of the last sticheron of the Resurrection. However, today we do not kiss one another as in the sticheron: "and let us embrace one another", but we kiss only the precious cross, the Gospel and holy icons, which the priests hold, greeting everyone who approaches with the words: "Christ is risen", and they answer: "Truly He is risen". If there be many people, then we begin the kissing not after the stichera of the Resurrection, but from their beginning, that is from the verse "Let God arise". If there be very many people, then the kissing will be also during the canon. And this kissing takes place thus:
If there be only one priest, he stands in the holy doors and from there gives the cross to be kissed by the people, greeting everyone: "Christ is risen", and the one Who kisses answers: "Truly He is risen". If there be several priests, then first the main one goes out from the holy doors and stands before the iconostasis, on the right side, that is opposite the icon of the Savior, looking to the north. After Him the second priest comes out from the holy doors with the Gospel, approaches the main one, and he gives him the cross to kiss, saying: "Christ is risen", having kissed, in His turn, gives Him the Gospel to kiss, answering: "Truly He is risen" and stands on His left. Then comes out the third priest with the icon of the Resurrection of Christ, approaches the first and He gives Him the cross to kiss, saying: "Christ is risen", and having kissed gives Him the icon of the Resurrection to kiss, answering: "Truly He is risen", and approaches the second priest, who gives him the Gospel to kiss, saying: "Christ is risen", and He, having kissed the Gospel, gives the second to kiss the icon of the Resurrection, answering: "Truly He is risen", and stands on the left of the second. The fourth priest comes out with the icon of the Theotokos, approaches the first, also the second and the third, of whom each gives him his object to kiss, saying: "Christ is risen", and having kissed gives each of them the icon of the Theotokos to kiss, answering: "Truly He is risen". So do also all other priests, as many as there be. In cathedral churches the Bishop, sitting on his throne opposite the icon of the Savior, gives the cross to be kissed, also each of the canons gives His insignia to be kissed, sitting on the seat. And when the kissing between the priests ends, then other sacred ministers and all the people approach one by one each Priest in turn, starting from the first, and kiss his insignia, answering: "Truly He is risen"[^622]. After the kissing once was read the "Homily" of Chrysostom, which is in the Flower Triodion.
8.	Litanies "Have mercy on us, O God" and "Let us complete" are sung by deacons, standing in their usual places.
9.	Great Dismissal, specific, at which, instead of "More honorable", we sing "Shine, shine"[^638] and, instead of "Glory, Both now", we sing "Christ is risen" once. The Priest stands with the cross in the holy doors, and the Deacon (if there be none, then the Priest himself) exclaims: "Wisdom". Choir (or second deacon, if there be one)[^623]: "Bless".
Priest: "Blessed be Christ our God... ages".
Choir: "Amen". "Confirm, O God, the catholic faith unto ages of ages".
Priest: "Most Holy Theotokos, save us".
Choir: "Shine, shine...".
Priest: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God, our hope, glory to Thee".
Choir: "Christ is risen from the dead... bestowing". "Lord, have mercy" (3), "Lord, bless".
Priest: Dismissal with the cross: "Christ, Who rose from the dead, trampling down death by death and upon those in the tombs bestowing life, our true God, through the prayers of His most pure Mother, of the holy, glorious and all-laudable apostles, of our venerable and God-bearing fathers and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for He is good and loves mankind".
Then, raising the cross up, exclaims: "Christ is risen" (3), and we each time answer: "Truly He is risen". We sing the final "Christ is risen" (3), the whole troparion, and after this we finish with the singing "and to us He has granted life eternal, let us worship His Resurrection on the third day"[^624].
Note on the doors of the iconostasis
"Let it be known also that throughout the whole Bright Week the great holy doors of the iconostasis and the small side ones in all churches remain open also during communion" (Rubric of our Pochaiv Triodion and Russian Typika).
RESURRECTION HOURS
Instead of each of the four Hours, also instead of Compline and the Midnight Office, throughout the whole Bright Week we celebrate a short order, given in the Triodion, in our Horologia and Molitvoslovs at Resurrection Matins.
Note: If the Hours are read together, then "Blessed is our God" we say only at the 1st Hour, and the others we begin from "Christ is risen" (3).
AT THE LITURGY
Everything - according to the general rubric of a feast of the Lord, only:
1.	Instead of "O Heavenly King", at the Proskomedia, at the Liturgy and wherever else, we recite "Christ is risen" (3) until the Ascension; and from the Ascension to the Descent [of the Holy Spirit], instead of "O Heavenly King", we read nothing[^625].
2.	Regarding "Christ is risen", one should know that at "Glory to Thee, O Christ God" before the dismissal of the Proskomedia and at the Liturgy we recite "Christ is risen" once, "Lord, have mercy" (3) and "Lord, bless".
At "Blessed is the Kingdom" we sing "Christ is risen" three times, that is once - the Priest and both choirs - once each (although in our Triodion is given: "priest - three times and choirs the same - three times"), and where there is only one choir, then the Priest - once and the Choir - once, then half - the Priest and half (from "and upon those in the tombs") - the Choir.
Also at "With the fear of God", instead of "Blessed is He that cometh" and instead of "We have seen the true light", we sing "Christ is risen" once. Instead of "Let our mouths be filled" and "Blessed be the name of the Lord" - "Christ is risen" (3)[^626]. Among us usually "Christ is risen" is recited also instead of "Be exalted, O God, above the heavens", however, this violates the memory of the mystery of Christ's Ascension, which is mentioned in this place of the Liturgy from the beginning. Our priests say "Christ is risen" (only these two words) also after "With the fear of God", after "Save, O God" and after "Always, now and ever", however, in no rubric do we find this.
3.	Instead of the Trisagion we sing "All Who have been baptized into Christ".
4.	During the reading of the Gospel, at each verse, all bells are rung[^627].
Our Sluzhebnyky: "If served conciliarly, then this Gospel is read by all priests and deacons by verses as the Superior decides". About this you have a detailed rubric in our and Russian Triodia. However, the custom that one and the same Gospel be read by all priests and deacons - is a superfluous invention of the Greco-Slavs, which today takes place among us only when the Gospel is read in different languages, as happens in our cathedral temples, in which the Bishop reads it in Greek from the holy doors, then the Deacon - in Slavonic from the ambo, and at the end canons and priests, placed throughout the whole church, in different liturgical languages. In Russia the Bishop reads the Gospel in Slavonic, and other priests - in Hebrew, in Greek and in Latin, in those languages in which the inscription on the Cross was written, then in other new languages (Muralt. 14. Brief. S. 142). The Greeks also read the Gospel, according to the new custom, in different languages, however, not at the Liturgy, but at Vespers (the Gospel read at Vespers of this day), as happens in the Patriarchate of Constantinople[^628].
5.	Instead of "It is truly meet", according to the new rubric, we sing the heirmos "Shine, shine" with the refrain "The angel cried" as in the Triodion and in the Constantinopolitan Typikon, but without the troparia of the 9th Ode of the Canon, as in our Sluzhebnyky, for these troparia are not about the Most Holy Theotokos, but about Christ's Resurrection.
6.	Before the dismissal, instead of "More honorable", we sing "Shine, shine" and instead of "Glory, Both now" - "Christ is risen" once. Dismissal with the cross and the rest, which is after the dismissal with the raising of the cross exactly as was indicated for Resurrection Matins.
7.	BLESSING OF THE ARTOS. After the Prayer behind the Ambo[^629] takes place the blessing of the Artos, for which you have the prayer in the Sluzhebnik after the Liturgy of the Resurrection; after the prayer the Artos is sprinkled with holy water. And this Artos with the feast, that is the icon of the Resurrection, after the dismissal of the Liturgy, is carried from the altar, on which it was blessed, to the tetrapod, where it remains until Bright Saturday and the faithful entering the church kiss it. On Bright Saturday at the Liturgy, after the Prayer behind the Ambo, the Priest, having come out through the holy doors, reads over it the prayer for breaking, given only in our Sluzhebnik on Bright Saturday, and after this, it is taken from the tetrapod, broken in the sacristy and on the next day, that is on the Sunday of Ap. Thomas, after the Prayer behind the Ambo, is distributed to the faithful by the Priest standing in the holy doors[^630].
Note: Throughout the whole Bright Week it is permitted to eat meat dishes.
BLESSING OF PASCHAL FOODS
It takes place, according to our custom and according to the rubric of the Triodion, outside the church or after the Liturgy (and then, going out of the church, we sing the Stichera of the Resurrection at will), or after Matins, or in homes on Saturday evening. The order of this blessing with sprinkling with holy water at the end you have both in the Sluzhebnik, and in the Trebnik, and in the Triodion, and in the Molitvoslov, after the Resurrection Hours.
ON THE DAY OF RESURRECTION IN THE EVENING
AT VESPERS
Notes
1.	The sacred ministers, dressed in all sacred vestments of their rank during the whole Vespers stand in the sanctuary at the altar, coming out only for the Entrance (and deacons - also for the litanies) before the holy doors and for the final kissing of the sacred insignia, if there be several priests - as was given for Matins[^631].
2.	Censing is done three times, that is at the usual beginning, only before the holy table, then at "Lord, I have cried" and at "O Gladsome Light", as usual.
3.	Entrance takes place with the Gospel, for it is to be read.
RUBRIC
1.	The Priest and deacons, if there be any, dressed in all sacred vestments of their rank, come before the steps of the altar and bow low, as usual. The Priest receives the censer with the usual prayer of blessing the censer, censes before the holy table, exclaiming: "Blessed is our God"[^632]; then, having given up the censer, ascends with the deacons the steps and sings "Christ is risen" once and both choirs - once each. After this the Priest recites clearly "Let God arise" and other verses with "Glory, Both now". The choirs, at each verse, sing "Christ is risen" once or three times exactly as was indicated for the beginning of Matins. Afterwards the Priest: "Christ is risen" up to "trampling down death by death", and the choirs: "and upon those in the tombs" and the rest.
2.	"In peace let us pray to the Lord" the Priest sings at the altar, and if a Deacon - then before the iconostasis.
3.	"Lord, I have cried" - in Tone 2, with the usual censing. Stichera - Resurrection of the Octoechos of Tone 2, given in the Triodion; Glory: Triodion, Both now: 1st Theotokion (Dogmatikon) of Tone 2.
4.	Entrance with the Gospel and usual censing at "O Gladsome Light"; and, after the Great Prokimenon, the Deacon, and if there be none, then the Priest himself: "And that we may be accounted worthy", priest: "The Reading from John...". Deacon: "Let us attend", and the Priest himself reads the Gospel from the holy doors (From John Sect. 65, up to "not believe").
5.	"Let us all say", "Vouchsafe" and "Let us complete".
6.	At the Aposticha: one Resurrection Sticheron of the Octoechos, given in the Triodion, then Resurrection Stichera with their verses and the kissing of the cross, or also of other sacred insignia exactly as was given for Matins. After the final "Christ is risen" immediately dismissal with the cross and the rest exactly as was given for Matins.
COMPLINE AND Midnight Office: Everything - according to the pattern of the Resurrection Hours, here on page 416.
GENERAL RUBRIC FOR ALL DAYS OF BRIGHT WEEK
AT VESPERS
Everything - as on the day of Resurrection in the evening, here on p. 421 [→REF:p421], except the Entrance, which takes place with the censer, and not with the Gospel, and there will be no Gospel.
Note
According to the previous rubric the Priest, at Vespers of Bright Week, from Monday onwards, should not use all sacred vestments, but from the beginning - only the epitrachelion, from the Entrance to the end - also the phelonion[^633]. Among us the custom is observed to use all sacred vestments on the first three days of Bright Week, that is on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday evening, since our people mark all these three days by abstention from work and presence at divine service. On other days of this week it is sufficient to use only the epitrachelion and phelonion.
COMPLINE AND Midnight Office: According to the pattern of the Resurrection Hours, here on page 416.
AT MATINS
Everything - according to the rubric of the Resurrection, here on page 408, only:
1.	At the beginning of Matins we do not go out before the church doors, but begin it in the sanctuary, before the altar[^634].
2.	We sing the Small Litany only after the 3rd, 6th and 9th Odes.
AT THE HOURS
Exactly as on the day of Resurrection, only on Bright Saturday the 9th Hour is read already with three psalms, as usual, and at it - Resurrection Troparion of Tone 8 "From the height", and Kontakion - to the Resurrection "Though Thou didst descend into the grave".
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Everything - as on the day of Resurrection, changing daily the Prokimenon, Apostle, Alleluia and Gospel.
2.	On Saturday, after the Prayer behind the Ambo, we read the prayer for the breaking of the Artos, given in our Liturgikon, in the order of Bright Saturday[^635].
GENERAL RUBRICS from the Sunday of Ap. Thomas to the Ascension
To the divine service from the Sunday of Ap. Thomas to the Ascension one could apply the general rule in the middle of a feast of the Lord. However, since each Sunday, beginning from the Sunday of Ap. Thomas, has a separate name and a separate service, which extends to the other weekdays of the given week and is as if a separate feast in the Easter time, the place of the Resurrection service is taken by the service of the Sunday, also on weekdays, together with some parts of the Sunday service of the Octoechos, except the eight-day feast of Mid-Pentecost, to which the Sunday service yields on weekdays. General rules of this time are as follows:
1.	At the beginning of every service, instead of "O Heavenly King", we sing "Christ is risen" (3)[^636], and at the end of every divine service, according to our custom, we also sing "Christ is risen" (3), also at the end we add: "and to us He has granted life eternal, let us worship His Resurrection on the third day"[^637]; and before the dismissal, instead of "More honorable", we sing "Shine, shine"[^638].
2.	At Vespers: On Sunday evening for Monday there will be no Entrance, as happens on the Sundays of Lent (for here there is no Great Prokimenon, and the Triodia give the litany "Have mercy on us, O God" at the end of Vespers), except the Sunday of Ap. Thomas, which, as a feast of the Lord, has also a Great Prokimenon. Finally, in the provinces the Great Entrance is made every Sunday evening, regardless of whether there is a feast or not.
3.	At Compline: From today we begin to sing the Canons of the Theotokos. After "It is truly meet" throughout the whole week, we recite the Kontakion of the Sunday; only during the eight days of the feast of Mid-Pentecost we read the Kontakion of Mid-Pentecost.
4.	We sing the Midnight Office as usual, only after the 1st Trisagion on the feast of Mid-Pentecost[^642] we take the Troparion of Mid-Pentecost, and on the Apodosis of the Resurrection[^643] - the Resurrection Troparion of the Sunday with its Theotokion; and after the 2nd Trisagion in the middle of Mid-Pentecost we take the Kontakion of Mid-Pentecost, and outside Mid-Pentecost - Kontakion of the Resurrection. The prayer "Remember, O Lord" will not be.
5.	We begin Matins from "Glory to the Holy" and immediately "Christ is risen" (3), then "Glory to God in the highest" and the rest; before the 50th Psalm we recite "The Resurrection of Christ": on Sundays - three times, and on weekdays - once[^639].
6.	At the Hours: after "Blessed is our God" we recite "Christ is risen" (3), and after the dismissal - "Christ is risen" (3) and add: "and to us He has granted life eternal" and further.
Note: Since we do not exclaim "Blessed is our God" when the Hour is combined with Matins or with the preceding one, also since we do not impart the dismissal when the Hour is combined with the following one, then we do not read "Christ is risen" then.
7.	At the Liturgy: "Christ is risen" we sing where also on the Resurrection of Christ; here, on pp. 416-418 [→REF:p416-418].
Antiphons: the two first - Resurrection, and the third - daily with the Resurrection refrain, also at "O come, let us worship" both on Sundays and on weekdays.
We conclude the troparia with the Kontakion of the Resurrection, except the Week of Thomas and Mid-Pentecost, for then we conclude with their Kontakion just as in the Triodion; although the troparia of the Week of Thomas can be concluded also with the Kontakion of the Resurrection, as it is in our Sluzhebnyky, in our Manuscript Typikon and Tserkovne Oko.
Instead of "It is truly meet" we sing "The angel cried" and "Shine, shine", except the eight days of Mid-Pentecost, which has its heirmos.
We sing the Resurrection dismissal, except the Week of Thomas, which has a specific dismissal. The dismissal with the cross we sing only on Sundays[^641], on the feast of Mid-Pentecost and on the Apodosis of the Resurrection.
We suppose that also on some other days, when there be a sufficient number of people, it would be good to sing the dismissal with the cross, however, not every day, as some do, having for this neither rubric nor general custom.
8.	The services of saints without Polyeleos, which fall on these Sundays, as also on others until Pentecost, on the feast of Mid-Pentecost and on the Apodosis of the Resurrection, we take at Compline.
SPECIFIC RUBRICS
from the Sunday of Ap. Thomas to the Ascension
SUNDAY OF AP. THOMAS
Second Sunday from the Resurrection. Tone 1.
We serve All-Night Vigil.
We sing everything according to the general rubric of a feast of the Lord of the first rank, however, at Great Vespers there will be no readings, at Matins we sing "The Resurrection of Christ" (3) (according to others - once), and at the Liturgy there will be no specific antiphons; the feast is leavetaken on the following Saturday.
WEEKDAYS OF THE WEEK OF AP. THOMAS
On the weekdays until the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearers we sing everything according to the general rubric in the middle of a feast; only at the Aposticha of Vespers and at the Sessional Hymns of Matins, which are after the 1st Stichology, and at the Praises (for there will be stichera also at the Praises and afterwards, at the Aposticha) there will be some stichera taken from the weekday service of the Octoechos, according to the tone and day of the week, except Saturday, which has the full service of the feast. Also at Matins, before the 50th Psalm - "The Resurrection of Christ" once. On Saturday we sing 3 canons: of the feast with heirmoi on 6, of the saint whose temple it is on 4 and of the Menaion on 4.

SUNDAY OF THE MYRRH-BEARERS
Third from the Resurrection. Tone 2.
AT Great Vespers
1.	"Blessed is our God", "Christ is risen" (3), Trisagion and the rest with "Our Father", "Lord, have mercy" (12), "O come, let us worship" (3).
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: 4 Sunday and 6 of the Myrrh-bearers (3 which are at "Lord, I have cried", and 3 which are at the Litiya); Glory: of the Myrrh-bearers, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone (Dogmatikon).
3.	At the Aposticha - Stichera of the Resurrection with their verses; Glory: "Thee, Who Art clothed with light", Both now: "The Day of Resurrection"[^644].
4.	After the final Trisagion: Sunday Troparion of Tone 2; Glory: "The noble Joseph", Both now: "The angel stood by the tomb".
5.	Dismissal of the Resurrection, without the cross.
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Myrrh-bearers.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: "The noble Joseph", Both now: "The angel stood by the tomb".
2.	After the 1st and 2nd Stichology - Sessional Hymns of the Myrrh-bearers; after "The Blameless" - "The Choir of angels"; Hypakoe of the tone and everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual. Gospel will be the 2nd Sunday and "The Resurrection of Christ" three times (according to others - once).
3.	Canons 3 [making] 14: Resurrection with heirmos on 4, Theotokos of the Triodion on 2 and of the Myrrh-bearers on 8. Katavasia of the Resurrection.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Triodion[^645]; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the Triodion; at the 9th we do not sing "More honorable"[^646], but we sing "The angel cried" and "Shine, shine"; after the 9th - "Holy is the Lord our God" (3) and Exaposteilarion of the Resurrection, Glory: of the Myrrh-bearers, Both now: the same.
4.	From the Praises to the end everything - according to the general rubric of the Sunday.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Sunday Troparion, Glory: "The noble Joseph"; Kontakion - of the Myrrh-bearers.
AT THE LITURGY: After the Entrance - Troparion Sunday and "The noble Joseph"; Glory: Kontakion of the Triodion, Both now: of the Resurrection ("Though Thou didst descend into the grave").
WEEKDAYS OF THE WEEK OF THE MYRRH-BEARERS
Everything - according to the general rubric of a saint in the middle of a feast; only at the Aposticha of Vespers and at the Sessional Hymns, which are after the 1st Stichology of Matins and at the Praises (for there will be stichera also at the Praises and afterwards, at the Aposticha) there will be some stichera or troparia, taken from the weekday service of the Octoechos of the current tone, different on different weekdays, except Saturday, which has everything of the feast. And in particular, at the end of Vespers: Troparion "The noble Joseph", Glory: of the saint, Both now: to the Myrrh-bearers, the Troparia "The noble Joseph" and "When Thou didst descend" in the evening we take alternately, every other day[^647].
AT COMPLINE: After the Trisagion - Kontakion of the Sunday. "Thus we take until the Sunday of All Saints" (Triodion).
AT MATINS
On "God is the Lord": Troparion "The noble Joseph" once and "When Thou didst descend" once, Glory: of the saint, Both now: to the Myrrh-bearers. If there be two saints with their troparia, then, we suppose, the Sunday one need not be taken.
At the Sessional Hymns and at the Praises there will be two troparia or two weekday stichera of the Octoechos of the current tone, with the usual refrains; before the 50th Psalm - "The Resurrection of Christ" once, at the end of Matins the troparia just as on "God is the Lord".
AT THE HOURS
Since no rubric gives anything about this, we consider that it should be thus: At the 1st - Troparion "The noble Joseph", at the 3rd - Sunday and Glory: of the saint, at the 6th - to the Myrrh-bearers, at the 9th - again "The noble Joseph" and Glory: of the saint. Kontakia: at the 1st and 6th - of the Myrrh-bearers, at the 3rd and 9th - of the saint. If there be two saints, then at the 3rd, after "Glory", will be the Troparion to the first, and at the 9th - to the second saint[^648].
AT THE LITURGY
Troparia: "The noble Joseph", Sunday and to the Myrrh-bearers; Glory: Kontakion of the Myrrh-bearers, Both now: Kontakion of the Resurrection[^649]; or Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the Myrrh-bearers, without the Kontakion of the Resurrection[^650].
If the service to a saint or for some need is also taken, then after the three troparia of the Sunday we take also the troparion to the saint or for the need; also the Kontakion to the Myrrh-bearers, Glory: Kontakion to the saint or for the need, and Both now: Kontakion to the Myrrh-bearers. Epistle and Gospel of the day. Everything else - of the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearers or also to the saint or for the need, if there be any.
SUNDAY OF THE PARALYTIC
Fourth from the Resurrection. Tone 3.
AT Great Vespers
1.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: 7 of the Octoechos (given also in the Triodion) and of the Triodion on 3. Glory: Triodion, Both now: Dogmatikon of the tone.
2.	At the Aposticha one Sunday sticheron, then Stichera of the Resurrection, Glory: of the Paralytic, Both now: "The Day of Resurrection".
3.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" - Sunday Troparion of Tone 3, Glory, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the Troparion.
4.	Dismissal of the Resurrection, without the cross.
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Paralytic only.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the Troparion.
2.	Two usual Kathismata, Sunday Sessional Hymns, "The Blameless", everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual, only Gospel - 4th Sunday and "The Resurrection of Christ" (3).
3.	Canons 3 [making] 14: Resurrection with heirmos on 6, Theotokos of the Triodion on 2 and of the Paralytic on 6. Katavasia of the Resurrection.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Paralytic, after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the Paralytic; at the 9th we do not sing "More honorable", but we sing "The angel cried" and "Shine, shine"; after the 9th - "Holy is the Lord our God" (3) and Exaposteilarion of the Resurrection once, Glory: of the Paralytic, Both now: the same.
4.	Stichera of the Praises - 8 Sunday, as usual; Glory: of the Paralytic, Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
5.	After the Great Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of the two.
6.	Dismissal of the Resurrection; after the dismissal - 3rd Gospel Sticheron.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Sunday Troparion and Kontakion of the Paralytic.
AT THE LITURGY
After the Entrance: Sunday Troparion, Glory: Kontakion of the Paralytic, Both now: Kontakion of the Resurrection. Everything else - of the Paralytic. Communion Hymn - "Receive the Body of Christ" and "Praise the Lord".
WEEKDAYS OF THE WEEK OF THE PARALYTIC
The service of the Paralytic covers only two weekdays - Monday and Tuesday, for on Wednesday the feast of Mid-Pentecost already begins.
On these two weekdays we sing everything according to the rubric of the weekdays of the Week of the Myrrh-bearers here, on page 429, only the troparia we take thus: at the end of Vespers and Matins - Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the saint, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the Troparion of the Saint[^651]. On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: of the saint, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the Troparion of the Saint.
At all Hours: Sunday Troparion, and at the 3rd and 9th - also Glory: of the saint. Kontakia: at the 1st and 6th - of the Paralytic, at the 3rd and 9th - of the saint.
At the Liturgy: Sunday Troparion, Glory: Kontakion of the Paralytic, Both now: Kontakion of the Resurrection. Epistle and Gospel of the day, everything else - of the Sunday. When the service to a saint or for a need is also taken, then: Sunday Troparion and of the saint or for the need; then - Kontakion of the Paralytic, Glory: of the saint or for the need, Both now: Kontakion of the Resurrection. Everything else - as above, and also to the saint or for the need; only Communion Hymn - "Receive the Body of Christ" and to the saint or for the need.
Note: If two saints fall, then at Vespers or at Matins we select the Theotokion to the troparia according to the tone of the second, and on "God is the Lord" we sing all troparia once.
On Wednesday of the fourth week from the Resurrection
MID-PENTECOST
Note
This feast is of the Lord, of eight days, which is commemorated on the Wednesday of the Paralytic and ends on the Wednesday of the Samaritan Woman, on which it is leavetaken. On the feast itself and on the Apodosis only the service of the feast is sung, and the service of the regular saint of the Menaion is sung at Compline; on other days - it is combined with the Menaion, except the Sunday of the Samaritan Woman, for then it is combined with the service of the Sunday. This feast has no All-Night Vigil, nor Polyeleos at Matins, only the Great Doxology, and at Vespers - both Entrance and readings. We begin its service on Tuesday evening, for the liturgical day begins in the evening of the preceding day.
RUBRIC
AT VESPERS
1.	Kathisma proper.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - stichera of the feast on 6.
3.	After the Entrance - Prokimenon of the day and 3 readings of the feast.
4.	Aposticha of the feast, Troparion of the feast and Great Dismissal, of Pascha.
AT COMPLINE: We take the stichera and canon of the regular saint; after the Trisagion - Kontakion of the feast.
AT THE Midnight Office
After the 1st Trisagion - Troparion of the feast, and after the 2nd - Kontakion of the feast; then "Lord, have mercy" (12) and dismissal. The prayer for the dead "Remember, O Lord" we do not take.
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the feast twice, Glory, Both now: the same.
2.	Two regular Kathismata with the Sessional Hymn of the feast; then "The Resurrection of Christ" once, Psalm 50 and immediately - Canon.
3.	Canons of the feast - 2 [making] 14: 1st - with heirmos on 8, and 2nd - on 6. Katavasia - Heirmos of the 2nd Canon.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn, after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos, after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the feast; at the 9th, instead of "More honorable", we sing the heirmos of the feast.
4.	Stichera of the Praises of the feast on 4; after the Great Doxology - Troparion of the feast, Great Dismissal, of Pascha.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Troparion and Kontakion of the feast.
AT THE LITURGY
Everything - to the feast, only the two first Antiphons - Resurrection, and the third - usual with the Resurrection refrain; also at "O come, let us worship". Instead of "The angel cried" and "Shine, shine" we sing the heirmos of the feast.
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE FEAST OF MID-PENTECOST
except the Sunday of the Samaritan Woman and the Apodosis
We sing everything according to the rubric of the feast of the Sunday of Thomas here, on page 424; regarding troparia, we take them thus:
1.	At the end of Vespers and Matins: Troparion of the saint, Glory, Both now: Mid-Pentecost.
2.	At Compline: Kontakion of Mid-Pentecost only.
3.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of Mid-Pentecost twice, Glory: of the saint, Both now: Mid-Pentecost.
4.	At all Hours: Troparion of Mid-Pentecost, and at the 3rd and 9th - Glory: of the saint; Kontakia: at the 1st and at the 6th - to Mid-Pentecost, and at the 3rd and 9th - to the saint.
5.	At the Liturgy: Troparion, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of Mid-Pentecost.
SUNDAY OF THE SAMARITAN WOMAN
Fifth from the Resurrection. Tone 4.
Note
The Feast of Mid-Pentecost blocks the service of the Samaritan Woman on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of this week, and on the other three days of it, that is after the Apodosis of the feast, the service of the Samaritan Woman is taken again; on this Sunday we sing the service of the Samaritan Woman with the service of Mid-Pentecost.
RUBRIC
AT Great Vespers
1.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: 4 Sunday, 3 of Mid-Pentecost and 3 of the Samaritan Woman, Glory: of the Samaritan Woman, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone (Dogmatikon).
2.	At the Aposticha: one Sunday sticheron, then Stichera of Pascha with their verses, only Doxastikon - of the Samaritan Woman.
3.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" - Sunday Troparion, Glory, Both now: Mid-Pentecost.
4.	Dismissal of Pascha, without the cross.
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Samaritan Woman, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of Mid-Pentecost.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory, Both now: Mid-Pentecost.
2.	Kathismata proper and everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual, only Gospel - 7th Sunday and "The Resurrection of Christ" (3).
3.	Canons 4 [making] 14: Sunday with heirmos on 4, Theotokos of the Triodion on 2, Mid-Pentecost on 4 and of the Samaritan Woman on 4. Katavasia of the Resurrection.
After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of Mid-Pentecost and Sessional Hymn of the Samaritan Woman, Glory, Both now: Mid-Pentecost. After the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the Samaritan Woman. At the 9th, instead of "More honorable", - "The angel cried" and "Shine, shine"; after the 9th - "Holy is the Lord our God" (3) and Exaposteilarion of the Resurrection once, Glory: of the Samaritan Woman, Both now: Mid-Pentecost.
4.	Stichera of the Praises - 8: 5 Sunday and 3 of the Samaritan Woman with their two verses; Glory: of the Samaritan Woman, Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
5.	After the Great Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of the two.
6.	Dismissal of Pascha, Glory, Both now: 7th Gospel Sticheron.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Sunday Troparion, Glory: Mid-Pentecost; Kontakia: at the 1st and 6th - of Mid-Pentecost, and at the 3rd and 9th - of the Samaritan Woman.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Antiphons, as every Sunday.
2.	After the Entrance: Sunday Troparion and of Mid-Pentecost, Glory: Kontakion of the Samaritan Woman, Both now: of Mid-Pentecost. Everything else - only of the Sunday. Communion Hymn - "Receive the Body of Christ" and "Praise the Lord".
MONDAY AND TUESDAY IN THE MIDDLE OF
MID-PENTECOST
We sing the service of Mid-Pentecost and of the Menaion of the saint according to the general rubric of the weekdays of the Week of Thomas here, on page 424; specifically we take the troparia according to the general rubric in the middle of the feast just as we gave before, on page 434.
WEDNESDAY OF THE APODOSIS OF MID-PENTECOST
We sing the whole service only of the feast, as on the day of the feast itself here, on page 434, except the Entrance and readings at Vespers and Epistle and Gospel at the Liturgy, which will be - of the day. The service of the saint of the Menaion we take at Compline.
THURSDAY, FRIDAY AND SATURDAY OF THE SAMARITAN WOMAN
We sing everything according to the rubric of the weekdays of the Paralytic here, on pp. 432-433 [→REF:p432-433].
SUNDAY OF THE BLIND MAN
Sixth from the Resurrection. Tone 5.
Everything - according to the rubric of the Sunday of the Paralytic here, on pp. 431-432 [→REF:p431-432]; only at Great Matins there will be the 8th Sunday Gospel and Katavasia - not of the Resurrection, but of the Ascension.
WEEKDAYS OF THE BLIND MAN
The service of the Blind Man continues only three weekdays: Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, on which it is sung together with the Apodosis of the Resurrection and with the Forefeast of the Ascension.
MONDAY AND TUESDAY OF THE BLIND MAN
Everything - according to the rubric of the weekdays of the Paralytic here, on pp. 432-433 [→REF:p432-433].
WEDNESDAY OF THE APODOSIS OF THE RESURRECTION AT VESPERS
1.	On "Lord, I have cried" - stichera of the Blind Man on 6, Glory, Both now: His.
2.	At the Aposticha: one Sunday sticheron, then Stichera of the Resurrection and "Christ is risen" once.
3.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" - Troparion of the Sunday, Glory, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in His tone.
4.	Dismissal of Pascha, intermediate, without the cross, with the commemoration of the saint of the day[^652].
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Blind Man only.
AT THE Midnight Office
After the 1st Trisagion, instead of "Behold the Bridegroom", we read the Sunday Troparion "Let us the faithful praise", Glory, Both now: its Theotokion; after the 2nd Trisagion, instead of "Remember", we recite the Kontakion of the Resurrection; then "Lord, have mercy" (12) and dismissal, and the prayer "Remember, O Lord" we do not say.
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory, Both now: its Theotokion.
2.	After the 1st Kathisma - Sunday Sessional Hymn, after the 2nd - Sessional Hymn of the Blind Man and immediately "The Resurrection of Christ" once, Psalm 50 and Canon.
3.	Canons 3 [making] 14: Resurrection with heirmos on 6, of the Blind Man on 4 and of the Forefeast of the Ascension on 4. Katavasia of the Ascension.
4.	After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the Blind Man and his Sessional Hymn, Glory, Both now: of the Forefeast; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the Resurrection; at the 9th, instead of "More honorable", we sing "The angel cried" and "Shine, shine"; after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the Resurrection twice, Glory, Both now: of the Blind Man.
5.	Stichera of the Praises on 8: of the Blind Man on 4 and Stichera of the Resurrection with their verses; Glory, Both now: "The Day of Resurrection" and "Christ is risen" once.
6.	After the Great Doxology - Troparion "Let us the faithful praise", Glory, Both now: its Theotokion; after the litanies - Great Dismissal, of Pascha, without the cross, with the commemoration of the saint of the day.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Troparion "Let us the faithful praise" and Kontakion of the Blind Man[^653].
AT THE LITURGY
After the Entrance: Troparion "Let us the faithful praise", Glory: Kontakion of the Blind Man, Both now: Kontakion of the Resurrection.
Apostle and Gospel of the day; everything else - just as on the day of the Resurrection itself. Dismissal - with the cross.
On Thursday of the sixth week from the Resurrection
ASCENSION OF THE LORD
This feast is celebrated for nine days, for it continues until the Friday after the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, on which it is leavetaken.
Feast, Afterfeast and Apodosis of the feast - according to the general rule of a feast of the Lord, only at the Liturgy our Sluzhebnyky, instead of "We have seen" and "Let our mouths be filled", give the verse "Be exalted, O God, above the heavens, and Thy glory over all the earth" and so we take until the Apodosis; on the following Sunday, of the Holy Fathers, the service of the Ascension has a specific rubric, for it is combined both with the Sunday service, and of the Holy Fathers, as is given below.
SUNDAY OF THE HOLY FATHERS OF THE FIRST NICAEAN COUNCIL
Seventh from the Resurrection. Tone 6.
AT Great Vespers
1.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: 3 Sunday, 3 of the Ascension and 4 of the Fathers; Glory: of the Fathers, Both now: 1st Theotokion.
2.	After "The Lord is King" - 3 readings of the Fathers.
3.	Sunday Aposticha, Glory: of the Fathers, Both now: of the feast.
4.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" - Sunday Troparion, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
AT COMPLINE: After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion of the Fathers, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the feast.
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory, Both now: of the feast.
2.	Usual Kathismata and everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual, only the Gospel will be the 10th Sunday.
3.	Canons 3 [making] 14: Sunday with heirmos on 4, Ascension on 4 and of the Fathers on 6. Katavasia of the Descent.
After the 3rd Ode - Kontakion-Ikos of the Ascension and Sessional Hymn of the Fathers, Glory: of the Fathers, Both now: of the Ascension; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the Fathers; at the 9th - "More honorable"; after "Holy is the Lord our God" - Sunday Exaposteilarion, Glory: of the Fathers, Both now: of the feast.
4.	Stichera of the Praises on 8: 4 Sunday and of the Fathers on 4; Glory: of the Fathers, Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
5.	After the Great Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of the two usual, and after the dismissal - Glory, Both now: 6th Gospel Sticheron.
AT THE HOURS
At all: Sunday Troparion, Glory: at the 1st and 6th - also of the feast, and at the 3rd and 9th - to the Fathers.
Kontakia: at the 1st and 6th - of the feast, at the 3rd and 9th - to the Fathers.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	After the Entrance: Sunday Troparion, of the feast and of the Fathers; Glory: Kontakion to the Fathers, Both now: of the feast.
2.	Everything else - only to the Fathers, only Communion Hymn - "Praise the Lord" and to the Fathers ("Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous").
ON THE SUNDAY OF THE HOLY FATHERS IN THE EVENING
The service of the Holy Fathers is leavetaken according to the following rubric:
1.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera: 3 of the Fathers and 3 of the saint of the Menaion, Glory: of the Fathers, Both now: of the feast.
2.	At the Aposticha - Stichera of the Fathers, only Both now: of the feast.
3.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" - Troparion of the Fathers, Glory: of the saint, Both now: of the feast. And thus the service of the Holy Fathers is leavetaken.
On Friday after the Sunday of the Holy Fathers
APODOSIS OF THE ASCENSION
On Thursday evening and on Friday morning the service of the Ascension is sung according to the general rule of the Apodosis of the feast. The service of the saint is sung at Compline.
SOUL SATURDAY BEFORE THE DESCENT
Everything - according to the rubric of Meatfare Saturday here, on pp. 320-322 [→REF:p320-322].
SUNDAY OF PENTECOST
1.	The service of this feast is celebrated for seven days, for it is leavetaken on the following Saturday. And it has this peculiarity, that on Sunday evening at Vespers for Monday prayers with bending of knees are read, and in the morning, that is on Monday the whole service of the feast is sung, without the Menaion, and at the Liturgy - also the service of the Holy Trinity, if desired[^654], as we will note immediately. Everything else, from the feast to its Apodosis, is celebrated according to the general rule of the feast, in the middle of a feast of the Lord. At the Liturgy "All Who have been baptized into Christ" - only on the feast itself.
2.	Here they have the custom on the day of Pentecost itself at the beginning of the Liturgy, after "Blessed is the Kingdom" (better before "Blessed is the Kingdom"), and afterwards, at the beginning of Vespers, after "Blessed is our God", to sing "O Heavenly King", bending the knees.
3.	Vespers on the day of the feast itself we sing immediately after the Liturgy, in view of the prayers with bending of knees, so that all people may participate in them[^655].
4.	The service of a saint who falls on Sunday and on Monday, we sing on another day at Compline, by the decision of the Rector of the church.
5.	Throughout this week at Compline - Canon of the Most Holy Theotokos, and also it is permitted to eat meat.
MONDAY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
On Sunday evening
Note
The prayers with bending of knees are read in three places of Vespers: after the Great Prokimenon, after "Let us all say" and after "Vouchsafe, O Lord". At each of these three stations of prayers the Small Litany is sung, each time with a separate exclamation, however, thus: "Lord, have mercy" (3), then the Priest - one station of prayers with bending of knees; at the end of the station the Deacon or priest continues the Small Litany, that is: "Help us, save us, have mercy", "Commemorating our most holy, most pure", exclamation. So - at each station.
RUBRIC
AT VESPERS
1.	Immediately after the Liturgy the Priest and deacon, if there be one, dressed in all sacred vestments, standing at the altar, begin Vespers. Priest: "Blessed is our God" and, after "Amen", all, bending our knees, we sing "O Heavenly King", then we recite the Trisagion and the rest with "Our Father" and "O come, let us worship" (3), as usual.
2.	Great Litany "In peace let us pray to the Lord" with the addition of specific petitions[^656].
3.	On "Lord, I have cried" - stichera of the feast on 6, Glory, Both now: "O Heavenly King".
4.	After the Entrance with the censer - Great Prokimenon of the feast.
5.	After the singing of the Prokimenon the Deacon or priest, standing in the sanctuary, begins the Small Litany thus: "Again and again, bending our knees, let us pray to the Lord"; choir: "Lord, have mercy" (3) and, when all bend their knees, the Priest, kneeling outside the sanctuary, before the holy doors[^657], reads aloud, so that all may hear, two prayers with bending of knees; after the conclusion of them all rise, and the Deacon continues the Small Litany, saying: "Help us, save us"; choir: "Lord, have mercy" once. Deacon: "Commemorating our most holy, most pure"; priest - specific exclamation. We do exactly so after "Let us all say" and after "Vouchsafe"[^658].
6.	Aposticha of the feast; after "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" - Troparion of the feast and the Great Specific Dismissal of this Vespers.
AT COMPLINE
The Canon of the Theotokos is not taken, but the Canon of the Holy Spirit of the Triodion is sung with the refrain "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee"; at the 9th Ode, instead of "It is truly meet", the heirmos of the same ode is taken, and after the Trisagion - Kontakion of the feast.
AT THE Midnight Office: After the 1st Trisagion - Troparion, and after the 2nd - Kontakion of the feast, without the prayer "Remember"[^659].
AT MATINS
1.	On "God is the Lord": Troparion of the feast three times.
2.	After the two usual Kathismata - Sessional Hymns of the feast and immediately Psalm 50 and Canon.
3.	Canons of the feast 2 [making] 14: first - with heirmos on 8, and second - with heirmos on 6. Katavasia of the feast.
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the feast; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the feast; at the 9th "More honorable" we do not sing; after the 9th - Exaposteilarion of the feast, Glory, Both now: the second.
4.	Stichera of the Praises of the feast on 4; Glory, Both now: of the feast.
5.	After the Great Doxology - Troparion of the feast; after the litanies - Great Dismissal of the feast "Who sent down from heaven".
AT THE HOURS: At all - Troparion and Kontakion of the feast.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	Antiphons: two first - of the feast, third - daily with the refrain of the feast.
2.	Entrance - specific; Troparion, Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the feast and Trisagion.
3.	Prokimenon and Alleluia - specific; Apostle and Gospel - of the day; Communion Hymn - of the feast.
Note
If the service of the Holy Trinity is also thought of, then after the Entrance, as we suppose (for there is nothing in the rubric), the whole service should be taken first of the Holy Trinity, then - of the Descent, Glory: Kontakion of the Holy Trinity, Both now: of the Descent; exactly so everything else: first - of the Holy Trinity, then - of Monday.
APODOSIS OF THE FEAST OF PENTECOST
Takes place on Saturday, according to the general rule of the Apodosis of a feast of the Lord.
SUNDAY OF ALL SAINTS
First after the Descent. Tone 8.
We do not serve All-Night Vigil.
AT Great Vespers
1.	"Blessed is the man", as usual.
2.	On "Lord, I have cried" - 10 stichera: 4 Sunday and 6 of the Saints; Glory: of the Saints, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone (8th).
3.	After the Great Prokimenon - 3 readings to the Saints.
4.	Sunday Aposticha; Glory: of the Saints, Both now: their Theotokion.
5.	After "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart" - Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the Saints, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the Saints.
AT COMPLINE: We begin to read the Canon of the Theotokos. After "It is truly meet" - Kontakion to All Saints.
AT THE Midnight Office: Everything - as usual, that is Canon to the Holy Trinity of the regular tone (8th).
AT Great Matins
1.	On "God is the Lord": Sunday Troparion twice, Glory: of the Saints, Both now: Sunday Theotokion in the tone of the Saints.
2.	Regular Kathismata and everything else up to the canon - Sunday, as usual. (Gospel - 1st regular).
3.	Canons 4 [making] 14: Sunday on 4, Cross-Resurrection on 2, Theotokos on 2 and of the Saints on 6. Katavasia regular ("I shall open my mouth").
After the 3rd Ode - Sessional Hymn of the Saints; after the 6th - Kontakion-Ikos of the Saints; at the 9th - "More honorable"; after "Holy is the Lord our God" (3) and the regular Sunday Exaposteilarion (1st); Glory: of the Saints, Both now: their Theotokion.
4.	Stichera of the Praises - 8: 5 Sunday and 3 of the Saints with their two verses; Glory: 1st Gospel Sticheron, Both now: "Most blessed Art Thou".
5.	After the Great Doxology - Sunday Troparion, one of the two usual; everything else - usual, as every Sunday.
AT THE HOURS: At all - Sunday Troparion, Glory: of the Saints, Kontakion - only of the Saints.
AT THE LITURGY
1.	After the Entrance: Troparion Sunday and of the Saints; Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the Saints.
2.	Prokimenon Sunday of the tone and of the Saints; Alleluia of the Saints, Apostle and Gospel of the Saints; Communion Hymn "Praise the Lord" and of the Saints ("Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous").
On Monday of the second week after the Descent
BEGINNING OF THE FAST OF THE SAINTS
CHIEF APOSTLES PETER AND PAUL
This fast begins on Monday after the Sunday of All Saints, and ends on the Eve of the feast of the Holy Apostles. Regarding the divine service on this, first, Monday, if a saint with Polyeleos does not fall, "Alleluia" was sung once and the whole church rule was Lenten, as on Lenten days of Great Lent; however, now we limit "Alleluia" to Great Lent, and here we sing "God is the Lord".
Regarding the fast; the Synod of Lviv limits it to Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays of each of its weeks and permits also dairy products; on the other four days it permits meat, however, on the condition of the 50th Psalm for the clergy, and 5 "Our Father" and 5 "Virgin Theotokos" for the laity, before lunch and before supper[^660].
On Thursday after the Sunday of All Saints
FEAST OF THE MOST HOLY EUCHARIST
Transferred to the second Sunday after the Descent.
This feast lasts eight days: from Thursday after the Sunday of All Saints to the next [Thursday], on which it is leavetaken. But since, according to our custom, it is transferred from Thursday to the following Sunday, the Synod of Lviv orders to sing the service of this feast on Sunday, with All-Night Vigil, exactly as given in the Triodion on Thursday of the feast itself, according to the general rubric of a feast of the Lord of the first rank, without the Sunday [service]; and on the days preceding and following this Sunday, to sing it according to the general rubric in the middle of a feast of the Lord. Besides this, the Synod orders that the procession with the Holy Mysteries take place on the Sunday itself, after the Prayer behind the Ambo, as usual, that is from the church to four altars, erected outside the church and equally distant from one another. Where this would be impossible, it will be sufficient to begin the procession from the altar in the church and, having gone around the church three times, to end this rite on the same altar in the church with the blessing with the Holy Mysteries. Regarding the four readings of the Gospel, which are usually sung at each of the four altars, the Synod orders to choose those in which there is mention of the Most Holy Mysteries, according to the rubric prescribed for this feast[^661].
After this two rubrics must be given: 1. How on this feast the Exposition of the Holy Mysteries takes place; 2. How the procession with the Holy Mysteries takes place.
RUBRIC I
ON THE EXPOSITION OF THE HOLY MYSTERIES
AT THE LITURGY
The Priest, on one of the days preceding the feast, let him consecrate at the Liturgy two Lambs: one let him consume at Communion, and the other let him place in the tabernacle and keep until the day of the feast. All this let him do according to the rubric given for Great Thursday here, on page 385, in the note. On the day of the feast itself, after the Proskomedia, immediately before the beginning of the Divine Liturgy, after the censing of everything as usual by deacons (or by the Priest himself), the exposition of the Holy Mysteries takes place in the following way: the first deacon (who is on the right of the Priest) places the Gospel on the right side of the holy table, unlocks the artophorion and, having bowed low to the Holy Mysteries, takes from the artophorion the pyx, all bend their knees, and he places it on the folded antimension; if there be a monstrance, then he unlocks the pyx, takes from it the Lamb, not touching it with his fingers, but holding by the stand on which it lies, places it into the groove of the monstrance, locks it well, then places the pyx into the artophorion, bows before it and, having locked the artophorion, places the monstrance, turned with face side to the people, on the antimension and steps aside a little to the right side. The Priest puts incense into the censer, blesses it, saying: "Blessed is our God", and censes with both hands the Holy Mysteries three times, bowing His head at each censing. Then, having taken upon Himself with the help of the second deacon the omophorion, approaches the holy table and, having bowed low, with the help of the first Deacon takes with both hands with the omophorion the monstrance and, having turned it with the reverse side to himself, turns his right side to the people and sings solemnly and majestically the beginning of the first strophe: "O saving Victim", and all people continue to sing the same strophe. And again the Priest - the beginning of the second strophe: "To the One God in Trinity", and all sing the rest. The Priest signs the people crosswise with the Holy Mysteries, then goes in a semicircle from the southern side to the northern and, having returned by the northern to the altar, places the monstrance on the antimension, having turned it with the help of the Deacon with face side to the people. Then, having stepped aside a little to the left, descends before the steps of the altar so as not to turn his back to the Holy Mysteries, kneels and, having put aside the omophorion and having censed again three times the Holy Mysteries, as at the beginning, waits, kneeling, until the Deacon, having approached the middle of the altar and bowed low, places the Holy Mysteries on the tabernacle. Then the Priest, having ascended the steps, begins the Liturgy from "Blessed is the Kingdom", "O Heavenly King" and the rest. During the Liturgy the sacred ministers never turn their backs to the Holy Mysteries, as our Sluzhebnyky prescribe: "When (the Priest), according to the ritual prescriptions, has to turn to the people, he should not turn from the middle of the altar, so as not to turn his back to the Body of Christ, but, having bowed low and stepped aside a little to the left side, from this side turns to the people and, having turned again to the altar, bows low to the Body of Christ, and then, when the Priest has to make a full turn, as at 'Always, now and ever', when he turns with the Holy Mysteries, then he does not make a full turn, so as not to turn his back to the Body of Christ"[^662]. Let us add also that when the Priest or deacon goes out before the iconostasis for censing, he does not cense from the middle, nor turns his back to the Holy Mysteries, but stands a little on the side, the Priest - from the side of the Theotokos, and the deacons: one - from the side of the Savior, and the other - of the Theotokos.
Notes
1.	If there be no monstrance, then the Holy Mysteries are exposed in the pyx.
2.	After the cleansing of the chalice the Priest does not place the Gospel on the antimension, since after the Prayer behind the Ambo the Holy Mysteries will have to be placed on the altar.
3.	If there be no deacons, then the Priest does all this himself.
RUBRIC II
ON THE PROCESSION WITH THE HOLY MYSTERIES AFTER THE PRAYER BEHIND THE AMBO
After the conclusion of the Prayer behind the Ambo the sacred ministers stand before the steps of the altar, and the first deacon ascends the steps and, having bowed low, takes down the Holy Mysteries from the tabernacle, places on the folded antimension and steps aside a little to his side. All kneel, and the Priest, having censed three times the Holy Mysteries and having taken upon himself the omophorion, ascends the steps, with the help of the Deacon takes with both hands the Holy Mysteries, turns to the people, as at the beginning of the Liturgy, and, having begun the troparion "Bread transubstantiated" or some other pious hymn, preceded by two deacons with censers, enters under the canopy and proceeds to the church doors to the sounds of bells and the procession from the church to the first altar begins, and the Choir and people continue to sing the troparion or something else. The order of the procession is such. In front goes the cross-bearer between two candle-bearers, then banner- and icon-bearers, then four girls with icons, after them the church brotherhood, two by two, with candles, choirs and all the clergy, two by two, with candles, according to their dignity: the nearest priests - in phelonia, and others - in epitrachelia, the last - the main priest with the Holy Mysteries, preceded by two deacons, who from the sides unceasingly cense, and candle-bearers surrounding the canopy. When the procession arrives at the first altar and stops near it, all the clergy divides into two wings, the canopy is placed opposite the altar, and the Priest with the Holy Mysteries ascends to the altar and, with the help of the Deacon, places the Holy Mysteries on the folded antimension; then, having bent his knees, censes them three times and, having risen, steps aside a little to the left and turns to the people. Then the Gospel-bearers approach the Priest, the Priest opens the Gospel at the place of the 1st reading, and the first Deacon exclaims: "And that we may be accounted worthy" etc., choir responds "Lord, have mercy" (3), priest sings: "Peace be to all"; second deacon: "Wisdom, Aright. Let us listen" etc., priest: "The Reading from the Holy Gospel according to (Name)" and, when the first Deacon exclaims: "Let us attend", the Priest reads the first Gospel (Matthew, Section 108. 17-30). After the conclusion of the reading he kisses its beginning and, having bent his knees before the Holy Mysteries, sings (if there is a custom) with other sacred ministers the first member of the supplicatory song "Holy God" three times and all people - the same three times. Then, having again censed the Holy Mysteries three times and risen, bows low, takes the Holy Mysteries with both hands and, having turned to the right to the people blesses them crosswise once (bishop - three times), saying quietly: "Save, O God, Thy people and bless Thine inheritance", and so, to the singing of the festal troparion or other hymn, the Priest enters under the canopy and the procession moves to the second altar, from it - to the third, then - to the fourth, and at each everything takes place exactly as at the first, only the members of the supplicatory song and the readings of the Gospels are changed, of which the second will be from Mark, Section 64.12-26; the third - from Luke, Section 108.7-22; the fourth - from John, Section 23.48-58. If there be several priests, they read the Gospels alternately. After this the procession returns to the church and the Priest, having placed the Holy Mysteries on the altar, kneels, censes them three times, rises and, having taken the Holy Mysteries and turned to the people, sings solemnly and majestically the verse of the Ambrosian hymn: "Save Thy people, O Lord" (3), and the people repeat the first and second time the same, and when the Priest sings it the third time and finishes with the words "and bless Thine inheritance" blessing the people once, then the people sing the further verses of this hymn, and the Priest, having turned with the northern side to the altar and placed the Holy Mysteries on it, descends before the steps, puts aside the omophorion, kneels and censes them three times. Then the right deacon approaches the Holy Mysteries, bows low, takes from the tabernacle the pyx and, having taken the Lamb from the monstrance, places it with the stand into the pyx, and places it into the tabernacle and, having again bowed, locks the tabernacle and places the Gospel on the antimension. If there be no deacon, then the Priest himself does all this. Then all rise, and the Choir sings "Blessed be the name of the Lord" and the rest of the Liturgy, as usual.
Notes
1.	In case it is impossible to have four altars, see what the Synod of Lviv prescribes here, on page 448.
2.	The Lamb placed in the tabernacle, let the Priest consume on the next day at the Liturgy together with the other, consecrated at this Liturgy: first - the consecrated, and then - the presanctified.
3.	On Sunday evening at Vespers we sing the Great Prokimenon of the feast, given in the Triodion on the previous Thursday evening.
On Thursday of the third week after the Descent
Apodosis of the feast of the Eucharist
Takes place according to the general rule of the Apodosis of a feast of the Lord.
On Friday after the Apodosis of the Eucharist
FEAST OF THE CO-SUFFERING OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS
We celebrate this feast as one day, without All-Night Vigil, but only with Polyeleos.
At Great Vespers: "Blessed is the man". On "Lord, I have cried" - 6 stichera; after the Prokimenon of the day - 3 readings of the feast and the rest of the service - only of the feast, according to the rubric of the service of July 2 here, on page 305. Litiya, given in the Triodion, without All-Night Vigil we do not serve now.
At Great Matins: Canon one with heirmos on 12.
At the Liturgy: at the 3rd Antiphon, at "O come, let us worship", if Thou wishest, refrain the refrain: "Through the prayers of the Theotokos, who sing to Thee", as in the Pochaiv Triodion. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- [^466]: The Moscow Typikon concludes the Sunday troparia with the kondakion of the Triodion, as if it were a feast of the Lord; our service books provide the Theotokion as well, and this is better, for the kondakion of the Triodion is not festal, but penitential.
[^467]: This is against the Armenians, who fast on Friday of this week in memory of the fast of the Ninevites, and on Saturday in memory of St. Sergius the General. The Greeks, hostile to the Armenians, invented a fable against them, that they fasted then for Artzibur, the dog of the Armenian bishop Sergius, devoured by wolves, whom Sergius sent before him to every city and village where he wished to go himself (Nilles Calend. Part. 2, p. 8).
[^468]: According to Greek rubrics, in these Sundays neither the Polyeleos nor "By the waters of Babylon" is sung, but only "The Blameless"; for the Greek Typikon prescribes the Polyeleos on Sundays only from September 2 to the Nativity of Christ (Chapter 51).
[^469]: Thus in the rubric at the end of the Sunday of the Prodigal [Son].
[^470]: Both at Vespers and at Matins we take the two litanies "In peace let us pray to the Lord" and, at the end, "Have mercy on us, O God" for the dead, although the rubric of the Triodion does not prescribe this; however, it provides for a Panakhida (Parastas) after Vespers, in which these litanies would be present. Since in reality we do not serve a Panakhida today after Vespers, we say its litanies at least at Vespers and at Matins; although our Horologia (at the end) provide the litany for the dead "Have mercy on us, O God" only at the end of Matins. After the dismissal of this [service], we add also "In blessed falling asleep" just as at the Parastas. At Matins we say the small litanies in their places, that is, after the Kathisma and in the Canon, after Odes 3, 6, and 9; we say the usual ones, and not for the dead, since our Pochaiv Triodion does not prescribe litanies for the dead at that time. Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon prescribe the litany for the dead after Ode 6. The Greek Triodion prescribes commemorating the dead at the litany after the Kathisma and at all litanies of the Canon: "At all litanies of the Stichology and of the Canon, all our departed fathers and brethren are commemorated". Our Manuscript Typikon agrees with this, in which: the Priest pronounces the petitions; either after the Kathisma or after the Canon he always mentions the dead. The Euchologion of Benedict XIV on the litany for the dead gives the prayer only when it begins with "Have mercy on us, O God", and never if it begins with "Again and again".
[^471]: Exactly so both our Manuscript Typikon and Tserkovne Oko prescribe: "and the verses - of Vespers". The usual verses given in the Horologion for "Alleluia" after "God is the Lord" are sometimes read on Saturdays throughout the year on which a saint has a service but does not have a troparion.
[^472]: "Making usually the prostrations at Vespers, and at Matins, and at the Hours." (Triodion on Cheesefare Wednesday, at Matins). Exactly so we sing also Great Compline with prostrations, as the Triodion prescribes; the Midnight Office with the usual 16 prostrations just as in Great Lent.
[^473]: On Wednesday evening for Thursday the Triodion has nothing more than what will be given.
[^474]: See note on p. 319 [→REF:p319].
[^475]: About two saints the rubric is silent here, however, on Monday of the first week of Lent Tserkovne Oko prescribes as we give.
[^476]: Since in Greek Triodia the triodion does not always have two heirmoi, but sometimes only one, the Greek Triodia give for these cases the following rubric: "In the odes where we sing the Triodion, we always omit such odes of the second Canon of the Octoechos entirely. And if the Triodion is with two heirmoi, we omit also the odes of the two Canons of the Octoechos."
[^477]: The Greek Typikon Chapter 5 does not prescribe prostrations after the pre-introductory psalm, however, the Greek Triodion prescribes them on Monday of the 1st week of Great Lent. The Pochaiv Triodion prescribes inaccurately: "at Vespers we begin prostrations"; more accurately - Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon: "from the beginning of Vespers we begin prostrations". Otherwise, where the rubrics inaccurately indicate prostrations here, there they must be supplemented by the rubric of Great Lent.
[^478]: These troparia, according to our Horologia and our Manuscript Typikon, are sung in Tone 1; according to the Greek Triodion (1724 Bologna) - in Tone 2; according to Russian rubrics - in Tone 4, according to the Greek Horologion of the Propaganda - in Tone 5. The Troparion "Beneath Thy tender mercy" in the Greek Triodion is prescribed without singing. "Is said without prostration, and without melody" (On Cheesefare Sunday evening). The Horologion of the Propaganda prescribes singing this troparion also, and in this case adding "Glory" to "Intercede", and "Both now" - to "Beneath Thy tender mercy", and with this in the new Constantinopolitan Typikon the Patriarch of Constantinople Gregory VI agrees (On Cheesefare Sunday).
[^479]: The Greek Typikon prescribes only 15 (Chapter 5); our Greek Triodion - 16 (on Monday of Lent).
[^480]: Regarding the place of "Lord, have mercy" (3), Glory, Both now: "More honorable", "In the name of the Lord", "Blessed" (or "O God, be merciful to us", or "Through the prayers of our holy fathers") we distinguish three distinct types of editions. Some place them before the prayer of St. Ephrem (our Horologia, Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon); some place them before the prayer "O Heavenly King" (Greek and Pochaiv Triodia, Horologion of the Propaganda and Russian rubrics; some do not present them at all (Greek Typikon Chapter 5).
[^481]: We suppose that the Greeks are somewhat more correct to extend the hand first, and then cross themselves, than we -- to cross ourselves first, and then extend the hand, for in the East extending the hand is a sign of respect and it is good when this sign precedes the sign of the cross.
[^482]: Empress Irene in her Typikon gives prostrations of great and small type, however, not at the prayer of St. Ephrem, but at "O God, be merciful, I have sinned before Thee, O Lord, forgive me"; gives for the first and second bending of the knees, and the difference between the first and second consists in that the great is done more slowly, and the small -- faster. At the beginning of the prostration she prescribes extending the hand, as does the Moscow Typikon of 1859 at the prayer of St. Ephrem (Nilles Calend. T. 1, p. LVII).
[^483]: The Greek Triodion which we have, and the Moscow Typikon do not mention prostrations at the second "O come, let us worship", but Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon mention them.
[^484]: These prostrations we make from the first day of Great Lent, for the rubric prescribes here only generally: "We celebrate Great Compline with prostrations"; exactly so at the Midnight Office.
[^485]: So in the Moscow Typikon; somewhat obscurely prescribed in the Pochaiv Triodion and in Tserkovne Oko: "troparia of the day and temple".
[^486]: "We stichologize three kathismata, bowing three times at each 'Glory' to the ground". Tserkovne Oko on the 1st Monday of Great Lent. However, the Greek rubric does not have "to the ground".
[^487]: Greek Triodion.
[^488]: Corrected by me (Ivan Dutka), because it was written «stichoslov'i» [stichology].
[^489]: "We, however, at the completion of the Praises, that is at the Glory to God in the highest, make three prostrations" (Greek Typikon Chapter 5).
[^490]: This we have supplemented from the rubric of Great Matins of Lent, for here, in the Triodion, only generally is mentioned about prostrations.
[^491]: The Peremyshl Typikon prescribes also "Save, O God"; in other rubrics this is not found, although the service of these days should have a Lenten form, but not in all parts; in this way here only two kathismata are taken and in the canon -- Octoechos, while in Great Lent -- three kathismata and canons without Octoechos.
[^492]: "In the odes where we sing the Triodion, such odes of the Octoechos, and of the Menaion are omitted".
[^493]: Tserkovne Oko.
[^494]: This Martyricon is a Sessional Hymn, and it is taken from the Sessional Hymns of Matins of the Octoechos, which is after the second Kathisma. If the saint has a kondakion, then this Martyricon is sung after the 1st Kathisma together with the compunctionate Sessional Hymns, that is penitential ones, before their Theotokion, with the Martyric refrain "Wondrous is God". "At the 7th Ode the Martyricon is said, if the Menaion does not have a Kondakion, but if it has, this is said together with the Sessional Hymns". (Triodion, at the end of the Octoechos, after the Sessional Hymns).
[^495]: Since the rubric of this Wednesday imprecisely defines the prostrations, we have supplemented it with the general rubric of the Greek Typikon and Tserkovne Oko, when "Alleluia" is sung (Typikon, Chapter 5, and Tserkovne Oko, Chapter 15). At the second verse of the Troparion "In the morning" only Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon prescribe prostrations.
[^496]: Pochaiv Triodion on Monday of the 1st week of Great Lent.
[^497]: Other rubrics do not prescribe for the choirs, but only for the Reader to bend the knees. "And while we answer, he (the Reader) makes a prostration to the ground, likewise also at the other two verses". Thus in our Greek Triodion and Manuscript Typikon on the 1st Monday of Lent. Tserkovne Oko prescribes for the Reader to make only one prostration to the ground, after the 2nd verse (1st Monday of Lent), although not in accordance with this in the 13th chapter prescribes 3 prostrations. And the Moscow Typikon prescribes bending of knees for both the Choir and the Reader: "When the canonarch reads the verse, at this time we bend the knees, and when the singers read, then he bends the knees" (chapter 9).
[^498]: Exactly so according to the Slavonic rubric: all this is sung together.
[^499]: In Oko: "prostration to the ground".
[^500]: According to Slavonic rubrics, if the saint does not have a troparion, then it will be the troparion of the weekday with the Theotokion in its tone; the Greek Triodion gives the troparia "Virgin Theotokos".
[^501]: Title IV, Chapter I, part 4.
[^502]: See note on p. 319 [→REF:p319].
[^503]: The rubrics are silent, however, one cannot take the troparia of the day, for here there will be no service of the day. According to the general Greek rubric, it should be the Troparion of the Fathers.
[^504]: We do not sing the Biblical Odes, although the Triodion prescribes them.
[^505]: See the note on prostrations on p. 326 [→REF:p326].
[^506]: Triodion, at the Praises.
[^507]: Thus we sing also in the middle of a feast, e. g. Jan. 7 and Sept. 15.
[^508]: Regarding the litany, we do not find unity in the rubrics. For some rubrics are silent about it, others prescribe it, and some exclude it. Those that are silent about it are the manuscript Vatican Typika... Those that prescribe the litany: The Greek Bologna Triodion 1724, Kyivan-Pechersk 1640, Lviv 1753 and some manuscripts. Those that exclude it: The Moscow Typikon 1859... Tserkovne Oko and the ancient manuscript Typikon... We suppose that the rubrics which do not prescribe the litany are more logical, for at all other Lenten Vespers and Matins this litany is not present...
[^509]: Although the Pochaiv Triodion after the three great prostrations prescribes: "and the rest, as usual", however, in all other Greek and Slavonic rubrics we find only 3 great prostrations.
[^510]: At this last Trisagion our Pochaiv Triodion and the Moscow Typikon do not prescribe prostrations, however, Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe them, and, in general, Greek rubrics...
[^511]: These prostrations are prescribed by all Slavonic rubrics.
[^512]: Tserkovne Oko.
[^513]: So in the Moscow Typikon, according to the Greek Typikon; and Tserkovne Oko and our Pochaiv Triodion at the odes in which there is no triodion, prescribe not only the canon of the saint, but also both canons of the Octoechos...
[^514]: Tserkovne Oko on Tuesday of the first week of Lent and Pochaiv Triodion on Monday of the first week of Lent.
[^515]: This, almost everything, - and in the Greek Triodion...
[^516]: Pochaiv Triodion.
[^517]: "The appointed monk sings the Prokimenon in Tone 6: In the morning; and while we answer, he makes a prostration to the ground, likewise also at the other two verses" (Greek Triodion on Monday of the 1st week of Lent).
[^518]: The Greek Triodion prescribes singing the 3rd and 6th Hours about the 3rd hour, and the 9th Hour, Typika and Vespers - about the 9th hour. Similarly in Slavonic rubrics, however, it is permitted to sing all this also together.
[^519]: Other Slavonic rubrics and the Greek Triodion which we have, do not prescribe transferring the prayer of the 9th Hour to the Typika and therefore, according to these rubrics, it should be recited at the 9th Hour...
[^520]: The Pochaiv Triodion and the Greek which we have, prescribe only a prostration metanoia; the Horologion of the Propaganda: metanoia megale /great prostration/; Tserkovne Oko, our Manuscript and Moscow Typika: "Prostration to the ground". According to our editions "Remember us, O Lord" is sung not only three times, but also before that, that is once - at "Glory" and once - at "Both now", however, without a prostration.
[^521]: The Pochaiv Triodion prescribes the dismissal, but other rubrics, immediately after the 16 prostrations, having omitted the Trisagion with "Our Father", the prayer of the 9th Hour and the dismissal, prescribe beginning Vespers from "O come, let us worship", which we think is better...
[^522]: Tserkovne Oko of Great Lent, fol. 38. In the Greek Triodion and in our Manuscript Typikon at "It is truly meet" we do not find a prostration...
[^523]: Pochaiv Triodion, fol. 39 verso. Moscow Typikon, fol. 154 verso.
[^524]: The reason for transferring the psalm "O God, come to my assistance" before the beginning of the canon may be that the beginning of this psalm agrees with the beginning of the canon, for the canon begins: "Helper and protector".
[^525]: This refrain is given also in the Greek Triodion.
[^526]: Although the Triodion here imprecisely defines these prostrations, nevertheless, Tserkovne Oko defines them more precisely (Great Lent, fol. 41-44). In the Greek Triodion it is noted generally: "We make the usual prostrations". Other prostrations, which we give here as great, in Greek rubrics are called only metanoias, without adding megalas, and at "Light of Christ" they do not give any prostration.
[^527]: Greek Triodion, Tserkovne Oko, our Manuscript Typikon and Moscow Typikon.
[^528]: Of the six stichera given in the Octoechos at "Lord, I have cried", the first and three last are - Martyria, the second, generally speaking, is - Hierarchal, the third - Monastic.
[^529]: We consider that it is proper to exclaim "Let us attend. Peace be to all. Wisdom, let us attend" not only before the first, but also before the second prokimenon.
[^530]: About the triple-candle is mentioned also in Tserkovne Oko... But better in Greek rubrics they mention only about a candlestick with a candle...
[^531]: In the Greek Euchologion it is prescribed for the Singer to sing "Let my prayer be set forth", in the Triodion - for the Domesticus, in Slavonic rubrics - for the Reader, in other Greek ones of Morellius and Barberini - for the Priest, which corresponds also to the new Constantinopolitan Typikon...
[^532]: In Bulgaria the Priest sings "Let my prayer be set forth" at each of the four corners of the holy table.
[^533]: In Greek copies censing is not mentioned, only in the oldest Barberini...
[^534]: Pochaiv Triodion, fol. 35.
[^535]: Moscow Typikon, fol. 319.
[^536]: Title IV, Chapter I, part 3.
[^537]: For some reason on every Saturday the memory of St. Great Martyr Theodore is honored... (Nilles in Eortologion). In Constantinople there was a great cult of one holy martyr... for the sake of the miracle of peace and for the sake of this miracle a more special feast was established, on which the annual memory is celebrated, on the first Saturday of the forty-day fast. Julian the Apostate... 362. St. Theodore the Tyro appeared at night to the Bishop of the imperial city... (Nilles Calend. Part 2, p. 106).
[^538]: We assume this, for the rubrics prescribe only: "Theotokion".
[^539]: So in Slavonic rubrics.
[^540]: Tserkovne Oko and Greek Triodion; similarly the Pochaiv.
[^541]: Thus, with a third canon Great Compline would be endless.
[^542]: Orthodoxy means correct belief, that is the correct faith regarding the veneration of holy icons, which the Iconoclasts destroyed. The Seventh Ecumenical Council (Second of Nicaea) in 787 restored their veneration. Another council, convened in Constantinople in 842, under St. Methodius, with the support of the holy Empress Theodora, ordered the commemoration of this restoration every year on the first Sunday of Great Lent.
[^543]: On account of Sunday the Triodion prescribes an All-Night Vigil, which once was every Sunday.
[^544]: So in our Manuscript Typikon, Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon, and with this agrees the Greek Triodion... evidently, incorrectly given in the Pochaiv Triodion of 1784: Sunday Canon, Theotokos and Triodion on 6.
[^545]: Tserkovne Oko.
[^546]: So we consider, relying on the rubric of Meatfare Saturday, for the rubric is silent here; and the Kondakion of the day "To Thee, O Lord, the Planter" in the whole service of these Saturdays is not mentioned.
[^547]: For we do not take it throughout the whole year at Matins and at Panakhidas for the dead on all Friday evenings we do not sing it.
[^548]: So we assume, because the rubrics are silent.
[^549]: According to the rubric of the Triodion this veneration next week will be only on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and only at the 1st Hour. Instead of "Direct my steps" the troparion "Before Thy Cross" is sung.
[^550]: Corrected by me (Dutka Ivan), because it was written «sixth», but the 6th Sunday is the Entry of the Lord into Jerusalem.
[^551]: After the 50th Psalm immediately, is written in the Greek and Pochaiv Triodia; so also in Tserkovne Oko: "then the 50th Psalm and canon". Not good in the Peremyshl Typikon is prescribed "Save, O God".
[^552]: Tserkovne Oko.
[^553]: The Moscow Typikon and the new Athenian Triodion prescribe Katavasia only after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th; but Tserkovne Oko and the Kyiv Triodion of 1640 prescribe Katavasia after each ode, which, we suppose, is more correct, for also on other days, on which the Canon of the Triodion is taken last, it has Katavasia after each ode, as on Meatfare and Cheesefare Saturdays and on Cheesefare Wednesday and Friday (although also for these two days the rubrics of the Triodion are imprecise). In the Greek Typikon, called of Sabbas, and the Typikon of the Lviv University there is nothing about Katavasia. Rubrics of other Triodia are imprecise: the Greek Triodion which we have, and the Pochaiv of 1784 prescribe Katavasia after all odes, except the 4th and 6th. The Pochaiv of 1767 and 1744 prescribe only after the 3rd, 8th and 9th, the Lviv - only after the 1st, 8th and 9th.
[^554]: Kyiv and Lviv Triodia.
[^555]: The Order of the Akathist, that is the Non-Sitting [Hymn], is sung in memory of the triple deliverance of Constantinople from the invasion of enemies, thanks to the intercession of the Mother of God, whose precious robe, brought from Jerusalem and placed by St. Pulcheria in the Blachernae church, and the Icon of the Hodegetria, painted, in the opinion of the Greeks, by St. Luke, were carried around the city, invoking her help. The first invasion was under Emperor Heraclius (reigned from 610 to 641) from the Persian army, led by the satrap Sarvar, and also from the Scythian army, under the command of the Khagan. Part of the enemies were destroyed by a small number of armed Christians who came out of the temple of the Most Holy Theotokos, and partly -- by a strong sea storm which destroyed their ships. The second invasion was 36 years later, that is under Constantine Pogonatos (668-685) and ended partly by the disease of the soldiers, and partly -- by a sea storm when they were returning home. The third was under Leo the Isaurian (717-741) and ended by a sea storm, famine, division of forces against the Bulgarians, by whom they were beaten (Synaxarion of this Saturday, about which also Nilles, Calend. vol. 2, p. 152).
[^556]: Besides the initial Kondakion "To the Directress", the rest of the Akathist consists of 12 Ikos and 12 Kontakia, together -- of 24 members according to the number of 24 letters of the Greek alphabet, with which each member, in the Greek text, begins in sequence.
[^557]: In the Patriarchal Church of Constantinople the Akathist is sung not at Matins, but before that, at Small Compline, that is at "It is truly meet" -- the first station by the Patriarch himself, the second -- after the 3rd Ode of the canon of the feast by the Bishop of Caesarea, the third -- after the 6th Ode by the Bishop of Ephesus, the fourth -- after the 9th Ode by the Bishop of Heraclea (New Constantinopolitan Typikon).
[^558]: The Greek Triodion does not prescribe any censing. Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe 4 censings, as do ours and the Russian rubrics, however, they order to cense only the icons and the brethren, ours and the Russian -- only the icons and the brethren, and at the other three stations -- only the Superior and the choirs. It would be better for us to cense only once, at the beginning.
[^559]: Title IV, Chapter IV, part VIII.
[^560]: In the Pochaiv Triodion: "we sing usual Compline". By Tserkovne Oko and, following it, Russian rubrics Great Compline is prescribed and then, after the 1st Trisagion, the Troparion of the feast is sung, after the 2nd -- usual troparia "Have mercy on us, O Lord"; after the Canon of Lazarus, instead of "It is truly meet", -- Heirmos of the 9th Ode of the Canon and, after the Trisagion, -- Kondakion of the feast.
[^561]: Similarly also the new Constantinopolitan Typikon... but Russian Typika prescribe the Biblical Odes.
[^562]: Greek vaïon /palm branch/ means a date branch, that is a palm branch, whence also the Latin Dominica Palmarum /Palm Sunday/, for John 12:13 also says: "Took branches of palm trees", although undoubtedly people cut branches of olive trees, for Christ entered Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives. Where date palms do not grow, there only olive branches are used; and among us, since olives also do not grow, willow branches are used, hence also in Tserkovne Oko: "reciting the prayer over the willow".
[^563]: But a Greek -- from his Euchologion.
[^564]: The first of these prayers is given in Greek Euchologia and the Moscow Typikon, the second -- in Tserkovne Oko.
[^565]: The Patriarch of Constantinople blesses the branches... before the Praises and distributes at the Praises...
[^566]: The service of these days is Passion-Penitential, foretelling the sufferings of Christ the Lord, Who here is presented in the image of the Patriarch Joseph, persecuted by his brothers, and the Jewish synagogue, which is depicted in the image of the unfaithful and adulterous wife of Potiphar; with the addition of the Gospel stories of these days, that is on Monday -- about the withered fig tree, on Tuesday -- about the Last Judgment, on Wednesday -- about the woman who anointed with myrrh and about the conspiracy of Judas with the Jews.
[^567]: The Pochaiv Molitvoslov of 1793 prescribes this dismissal "on Sunday evening, on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of HOLY and Great Week at Matins and at the Hours"; the Pochaiv Horologion of 1811 adds to Wednesday also Thursday at Matins. However, the rubrics of the Triodion at these Matins do not indicate a dismissal, for they are small and on the first three days -- of Lenten form and are combined with the 1st Hour. At the Hours one should not omit this dismissal, nor at the Presanctified, as we consider; Tserkovne Oko of 1615 and, before it, the Liturgikon of Ballaban of 1604 extend this dismissal to the whole Passion Week, except Saturday.
[^568]: Tserkovne Oko and the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople do not prescribe the Kondakion of the Triodion, but only "O Lord of Hosts, be with us". In the Greek Triodion nothing is mentioned about what Compline should be and what troparia to recite at it.
[^569]: So in our and the Russian Menaia. More correctly Tserkovne Oko prescribes also on Wednesday evening Great Compline, and only on Thursday and on Friday evening, -- Small, in view of the long duration of Passion and Tomb Matins. Also the Greek Typikon of Sabbas at the end of Compline...
[^570]: Neither our Manuscript Typikon, nor the Typikon of the Lviv University, nor Tserkovne Oko, nor the Pochaiv Triodion of 1767, nor the Ostromir Gospel prescribe here the Gospel at Matins. Two most ancient Vatican codices prescribe it... also the Greek Typikon of Sabbas, of the new ones -- Pochaiv Triodion 1786, Greek Bologna Triodion 1724, new Constantinopolitan Typikon and new Athenian Triodion.
[^571]: In Greek rubrics "Save, O God" is not mentioned, but it is mentioned in Tserkovne Oko, and after it, in our and the Russian Triodia.
[^572]: So in our and the Russian Triodia.
[^573]: In the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople it is not even mentioned.
[^574]: The Pochaiv Triodion of 1786 gives the following: "Immediately the holy Four Gospels are placed on the decorated analogion between two lit candlesticks. All stand with uncovered heads, and the Priest censes the whole temple and the brethren: at the 6th Hour he censes only the Gospel, and at the 9th -- the Gospel, the whole temple and the brethren, then reads the Gospel". Russian Typika: "The Priest censes around the analogion, the altar, the whole church and the brethren according to the order". In the Greek Triodion nothing of this is mentioned, but only: "The Four Gospels are read on Monday, on Tuesday and on Wednesday and completed".
[^575]: So the Pochaiv Triodion according to Tserkovne Oko. And the Moscow Typikon: "In the cells are made until Great Friday".
[^576]: The subject of the divine service of Great Thursday is the Mystical Supper, the washing of feet, the betrayal of Judas and, partly, Christ's passion.
[^577]: Our Manuscript Typikon, Tserkovne Oko and the Ostromir Gospel do not prescribe the Gospel, but others -- prescribe it.
[^578]: Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe on 12.
[^579]: Tserkovne Oko.
[^580]: If our Pochaiv Triodion has such on Great Tuesday, then here also it should be so.
[^581]: About this we mentioned for Palm Sunday evening here, on p. 378 [→REF:p378], part 5.
[^582]: Tserkovne Oko.
[^583]: The subject of the divine service of Great Friday is the Passion of the Lord, which begins at Vespers, which anticipates Friday. But since the Liturgy which is joined to this Vespers is of Thursday, therefore the subject of the service of Thursday appears at this Vespers. On this day in cathedral temples only one conciliar hierarchal Liturgy is celebrated. And before Vespers (at 9 o'clock) the hierarch consecrates antimensions, at the Liturgy, after "And may the mercies be", -- consecrates chrism, and after the prayer behind the ambo -- washes the feet.
[^584]: Synod of Lviv, Title IV, Chapter IV, part VII.
[^585]: Greek Typikon of Sabbas and the new Athenian Triodion: "By the blessing of the Priest we sing the Six Psalms". Evidently the first part of Matins falls out, from the usual beginning to "Glory to the Holy".
[^586]: So in Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon.
[^587]: Our Greek and Pochaiv Triodia, and in the new Athenian Triodion and Constantinopolitan Typikon is added also: "Glory to Thee".
[^588]: In Greek rubrics and in one Slavonic manuscript Triodion which we have, neither censing at any of the 12 Gospels, nor Small Litany is prescribed. Tserkovne Oko prescribes a Small Litany both at the first Gospel and before all five Sessional Hymns, and prescribes leaving the censing at the 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th Gospels. The new Constantinopolitan Typikon prescribes one censing not at the Gospel, but at the beginning of Matins, during the Two Psalms according to the general rubric of Matins. But since among us at Small Matins this censing is omitted, at least here we have given at the first [Gospel] -- censing not only of the holy table, but also of the icons, and choirs, according to the general rubric of the beginning of Matins. Although Greek rubrics at these Gospels do not prescribe censing, nothing strange, for in Greek and Slavonic Typika at Matins Gospels censing is not prescribed. Tserkovne Oko prescribes at the first Gospel two censings: one -- at the beginning, only of the holy table and the whole sanctuary, the second -- at the end: of the whole church, images and choirs. At the six following -- censing of images, the Superior and choirs (however, here it inconsistently agrees with itself, when it is given that at the Sessional Hymns the Priest or deacon censes also the holy table); at Gospels 8, 9, 10 and 11 it does not prescribe censing, and at the 12th again prescribes censing of the whole church, choirs and brethren. The Moscow Typikon follows Tserkovne Oko, however, at the 1st Gospel prescribes only one censing, at the beginning -- of the whole temple; it prescribes inaccurately that the litanies of the Sessional Hymns are said up to the 8th Gospel, for the Sessional Hymns extend only to the 6th Gospel. Although Greek rubrics do not prescribe censing at the Gospels, nevertheless, at the Sessional Hymns they prescribe standing. "We do not sit at such Sessional Hymns, but we sing them standing".
[^589]: In the Patriarchate of Constantinople the first -- the Patriarch, the twelfth -- the Grand Archdeacon from the ambo; and at the beginning, at the Two Psalms, censes the Grand Archimandrite, dressed in a golden phelonion (New Constantinopolitan Typikon).
[^590]: Today it is sufficient to sing once.
[^591]: Tserkovne Oko prescribes repeating also the Theotokion, however, since the Theotokion serves to end the troparia, it should not be repeated; in the Triodion the refrain "Glory, Both now" is given together before the Theotokion.
[^592]: The Moscow Typikon prescribes 9, it must be understood -- with "Glory, Both now"; Tserkovne Oko prescribes 10; our Pochaiv and Greek Triodia -- 8, however, inaccurately, for they give only 7, except the two at "Glory, Both now".
[^593]: Tserkovne Oko.
[^594]: If on Great Tuesday our Triodion gives such, then here also it should be so.
[^595]: New Constantinopolitan Typikon and new Athenian Triodion.
[^596]: So in general Slavonic editions; but Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe this litany in full, as usual.
[^597]: In the new Constantinopolitan Typikon the Great Dismissal is prescribed, but we have the custom to impart the Great [Dismissal] -- at Great Matins.
[^598]: Latins in the three days of Christ's death not only do not expose the Holy Mysteries, but do not even keep them in the temple; tombs of Christ among them are erected without the Holy Mysteries.
[^599]: According to the rubric of the Greek Triodion, our Pochaiv and the Moscow Typikon -- are sung all together at the 2nd hour of the day; according to our Manuscript Typikon, the 1st Hour -- at the 1st hour of the day, and the others -- at the 7th hour of the day. According to Tserkovne Oko all -- at the 7th hour of the day; according to the new Constantinopolitan Typikon -- at the 1st hour of the day.
[^600]: The magnificent rite of the Shroud in ancient Triodia and Typika is not given, for it was introduced later; however, today it is used among all followers of the Greek rite, and among us -- also with the exposition of the Holy Mysteries, according to the custom of the Latins of the Austrian State and various German dioceses (Nilles, Calend. T. 2, p. 312). It is described in our Sluzhebnyky, published in Pochaiv back under Stanislaus Augustus in 1767, then in Russian Typika and in the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople. However, in our Sluzhebnyky the procession with the Shroud is given only at Vespers, in Russian rubrics -- only at Saturday Matins, after the Great Doxology, and in the Constantinopolitan Typikon the bringing out into the temple to the tomb is prescribed at Vespers, the procession around the temple -- at Matins.
[^601]: Many rubrics add to "The noble Joseph" also the troparion "The angel stood by the tomb" (with the refrain "Glory, Both now"). But Tserkovne Oko, our Manuscript Typikon and the Manuscript Triodion which we have, give only "The noble Joseph", and so they take in the arch-altar temple.
[^602]: According to the rubric of the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, the placing of the Shroud into the tomb takes place during the singing of the Aposticha, in the following way: "The Aposticha are sung, and six priests with uncovered heads, dressed in priestly vestments, go out from the left door of the sanctuary, carrying with reverence on their heads the Epitaphios /Shroud/, of whom the Archimandrite holds also the Holy Gospel, preceded by singers, the Primicerius holding the Divamboulon (a type of candlestick with two lamps), the Deacons with lamps and censers, and thus proceed up to the prepared canopy, and the singers stand in order, singing the Aposticha, and the Deacons censing go around 3 times with the Priests around the canopy. Then they place the Epitaphios inside the canopy, the doorkeeper sprinkles fragrant flowers upon the Epitaphios, and having approached the Patriarch venerates the Epitaphios, blesses the Christians, and ascends the throne. Then the doorkeeper offers him flowers prepared. Then also the holy hierarchs, two by two, venerating the Epitaphios, receive flowers from the Patriarch, likewise also the Ecclesiastical officials. This being done, the 2nd choir sings the Doxastikon, and from the Doxastikon... Now lettest Thou" and the rest. The description which we have from the island of Corfu gives this: "The icon of the Epitaphios is carried on Holy and Great Friday from the sanctuary at the end of Vespers, while the Dismissal Troparia 'The noble Joseph', etc. are sung, and is placed on a prepared table in the middle of the presbyterium, where there are already and remain lit candles with vessels of flowers throughout the whole day until the hour of Matins of Great Saturday (which is usually celebrated on the evening of Great Friday). Where again at the end of the Great Doxology at 'Holy God', the Epitaphios is carried out, but inside the church and, if circumstances permit, -- outside and again is placed on this same table until the time of the Liturgy of Great Saturday, when one priest privately in an epitrachelion places it in the sanctuary in the usual place".
[^603]: So in our Pochaiv Triodion; other editions, from the usual beginning to "God is the Lord", give everything -- as usual, only the Typikon of the Lviv University prescribes beginning from the Six Psalms.
[^604]: Our Triodion and the Greek which we have, the Typikon of the Lviv University do not prescribe twice, nevertheless, Tserkovne Oko, the Manuscript Triodion and Typikon which we have, prescribe twice.
[^605]: In our Pochaiv Triodion nothing is prescribed to cense, it is noted only: "and, having censed crosswise". In the Greek Triodion censing is mentioned only at the 2nd and 3rd stations and it is not mentioned what should be censed. In Tserkovne Oko censing is prescribed at the 1st station of the whole church and brethren according to the order, and at the others -- only of the choirs. In the Constantinopolitan Typikon is prescribed -- only at the 1st station, only of the Shroud and the people: "The Patriarch... censing the Epitaphios, and the whole people".
[^606]: Tserkovne Oko.
[^607]: This troparion is prescribed only once: Typikon of Sabbas, Greek Triodion, Greek Typikon, our Manuscript Typikon, another of Lviv University; other rubrics prescribe it twice, the second time -- with the refrain "Glory, Both now". Tserkovne Oko prescribes it first once, then Glory: the ending, Both now: whole. Obviously, all rubrics have this troparion; and the troparion "The noble Joseph", which is sung before it, is prescribed primarily by various Greek and Slavonic rubrics and the Greek Typikon of Sabbas. The sticheron "Come, let us bless" only our editions have, and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, before the troparion "The noble Joseph" prescribes also the Resurrection Troparion "When Thou didst descend" and "The angel stood by the tomb". Before the troparion "The noble Joseph" our and Greek rubrics prescribe: "Let us attend. Peace be to all. Wisdom, let us attend", others Slavonic -- only "Wisdom, Aright"; and since they do not prescribe here "The noble Joseph", they prescribe "Wisdom, Aright" to exclaim before the Troparion of the Prophecy. Tserkovne Oko prescribes "Wisdom, Aright" before "The noble Joseph", and before the Troparion of the Prophecy: "Let us attend. Peace to Thee. Wisdom, let us attend". The Entrance, according to the Russian rubric, takes place in the following way: "Then the Superior enters the holy altar with the priests and deacons, vests in all sacred vestments, and the priests -- only in phelonia, comes out with the Gospel under the Shroud, with priests who support, and deacons who cense. At this time ringing is done with all might. He is preceded with candles and with two candlesticks, and both choirs sing the funeral Trisagion. The Abbot, having come before the holy royal doors, stands here, awaiting the conclusion of the last Trisagion. When it ends, the Superior with the Gospel enters the royal doors and places the Gospel on the altar, and the Shroud -- on the prepared table, in the form of a tomb. In monasteries, after the dismissal, the kissing of the Shroud, placed in the tomb, takes place". This is -- the Moscow Typikon. In the Patriarchate of Constantinople it takes place thus: "Great Doxology. Then we begin the sung [Trisagion], preceding the Epitaphios, and going out of the temple, the Entrance takes place, as is customary; as soon as we return, the Patriarch enters directly into the holy sanctuary, with the rest, and immediately exclaims 'Let us attend. Peace be to all. Wisdom'. And the Troparion 'When Thou didst descend' is sung. He censes around the holy table, preceded by the Epitaphios, then 'The angel stood by the tomb' up to 'appeared as a stranger'. After this is sung 'The noble Joseph', up to 'wrapped, laid', and they place the Epitaphios on the holy table. At once the canonarch from outside reads the Troparion, the Prophecy and the Apostle, and the Gospel is said by the Patriarch, in front of the Gate" (New Constantinopolitan Typikon). In various parts of Greece, according to the testimony of Allatius, the procession takes place in the following way: "The custom prevailed, that, while Ps. 118 is sung, and at individual verses individual Troparia are sung, Christ beautifully carved, or skillfully painted on a board, and placed in a bier, with a solemn apparatus of burning candles, Priests, dressed as when they celebrate the sacred solemnities of Masses, the rest of the Clergy accompanying not without order, and the faithful of Christ following the bier through the streets of the city, is carried, and set forth to all to be adored, and kissed: and thus is open to the veneration of all. Meanwhile flowers placed on the image, are sought by all with the greatest zeal, which they promise to themselves for the greatest good, not only of the body, but of domestic affairs" (Nil). Kalend. vol. 2, p. 241).
[^608]: According to rubrics: at 10 o'clock in the day; to end the Liturgy -- at the 2nd hour of the night. "At the 2nd hour of the night".
[^609]: 2 Manuscript rubrics which we have, and Tserkovne Oko prescribe only three verses: 1. "God stood"; 2. "How long will ye judge"; 3. "They know not". The Greek Typikon of Sabbas prescribes the whole psalm of five verses.
[^610]: So according to the rubric of our and the Russian Triodia; similarly also the Greek Typikon of Sabbas, only, instead of violet, prescribes dark vestments: "The Singer being about to begin the present verse, Arise O God, the priests stand up, take off the black phelonia, and put on white instead of them". According to the Greek Triodion, Tserkovne Oko and another manuscript rubric, white vestments are prescribed from the beginning of Vespers. Mauros we translate as dark, and not as black, for black will be -- melas.
[^611]: In the new Athenian Triodion this service is called Pannychis /Vigil/.
[^612]: 2 Lviv Sluzhebnik of 1780 and Moscow Typikon.
[^613]: In Constantinople the Patriarch places the Shroud on the holy table.
[^614]: So it takes place in Russia, according to the testimony of Muralt, letter 14: "around the holy Table, on which the Shroud is spread, which remains here until the Day of the Ascension".
[^615]: According to the ancient rubric of community life the procession goes from the temple into the narthex through the northern doors of this narthex and there, before its central doors leading into the temple, the beginning of Matins is sung. Carried are: Gospel -- by the Priest and censer -- by the Deacon, preceded by candle-bearers, brethren with lit candles, as you have in the Greek Pentecostarion. To this the Pochaiv Triodion adds the icon of the Resurrection of Christ, and Tserkovne Oko -- also the icon of the Most Holy Theotokos and other holy icons, carried by priests and deacons, so that in such a way the procession would be more majestic, than only with candles. According to the custom of the surroundings of Greece, independent of the Patriarch of Constantinople, before this procession the Bishop or priest, standing in the holy doors with a lit candlestick in hand, exclaims in a loud voice: "Come ye, take light from the unwaning light, and glorify Christ, Who is risen from the dead", that is "Come, receive light from the unwaning light and kiss Christ, risen from the dead". And so all approach one by one, to light their candles from him, forming after this the procession (The Holy Passions. Athens. 1892)
[^616]: In the Greek Triodion this procession is described thus: "About the hour of Matins all the semantrons sound. And the Ecclesiarch distributes candles to the brethren; the Priest with the Deacon vest in all their priestly attire. Then, taking, the Priest the holy Gospel, and the Deacon the censer, and preceded by lamps, we go out to the narthex, holding lit candles, and singing 'Thy Resurrection, O Christ Savior', etc. And in the temple remaining alone the candle-lighter lights all the candles and lamps; and having made a fire, and having put incense into it, places it in the middle of the temple /About the time of Matins all clappers gave notice. The Ecclesiarch distributes candles to the brethren, and the Priest with the Deacon vest in light sacred vestments. Then the Priest, having taken the holy Gospel, and the Deacon -- the censer, preceded by lights, and we all go out to the narthex, holding lit candles and singing: 'Thy Resurrection, O Christ Savior'. In the temple remains only the sacristan, who lights all candles and lamps, after which, having lit a fire, throws incense into it and places in the middle of the temple/."
[^617]: Slavonic rubrics before that prescribe to cense everyone, but we, according to the Greek rubric, cense here only directly the church doors. Evidently also our, or Russian rubrics, according to Tserkovne Oko prescribe for the Priest to sign with the censer three times crosswise the church doors. The Typikon of the Lviv University orders to cense crosswise, but not three times and not the church doors: "Makes a cross with the censer, saying: 'Glory to the Holy'". The Greek Pentecostarion gives only: "and censing says" /and, having censed, exclaims/.
[^618]: So the Greek Typikon of Sabbas, the Typikon of the Lviv University, manuscript Flower Triodia which we have, and our Apostles and Sluzhebnyky. Pochaiv 1788 -- at the Liturgy of Easter, Moscow Typikon -- at Resurrection Matins, other rubrics prescribe three times.
[^619]: According to the new custom of the Greeks, which Slavs do not accept, before the beginning of Matins the Priest sings the Sunday Gospel of Matins, usually -- the 2nd. This the Greek Typikon of Sabbas does not have, but only newly published Greek Pentecostaria. Also according to the custom (and not according to the church rubric) of the Greeks, independent of the Patriarch of Constantinople, the entrance into the church is accompanied by questions and answers taken from the 23rd Psalm: "Lift up your gates, O ye princes, and the King of Glory shall come in" etc. and when is sung: "The Lord of Hosts, He is the King of Glory", the doors are opened and the entrance into the church takes place... "Especially the custom prevailed to enter through question and answer: Lift up gates, and to open the door only at The Lord of powers, He is the King of Glory /Especially the custom prevailed, that the entrance into the church be accompanied by dialogue, question and answer 'Lift up the gates', and the doors are opened only at 'The Lord of Hosts, He is the King of Glory'/, -- is written in the description from Corfu. This custom we meet also among Greek-Melkites, and Italians, and also in various churches of the Latin rite... However, neither in Greek nor in Slavonic rubrics is this met, nor the words of the named psalm fit well here, for according to general explanation they refer not to the descent of Christ into hell, but to His Ascension...
[^620]: "The Priest censes at the beginning of the Canon, according to the order /The Priest censes at the beginning of the canon, as prescribed/ (Greek Triodion).
[^621]: That which is prescribed in Tserkovne Oko and, following it, in our and the Russian Triodia, that the Small Litany after each ode "will be on this holy day outside the sanctuary", does not agree with the Greek Triodion, for in it, instead of "outside the sanctuary", is given "inside the sanctuary",... as have also the Typikon of the Lviv University and the manuscript Slavonic Triodion which we have. However, this contradiction can be eliminated if we say that the Greek Triodion and other rubrics order on this day to sing all litanies for the Priest, and not for the Deacon, and for the Deacon -- only to carry the censer and recite the verses "Let God arise"; and with this assumption the Priest sings all litanies inside the sanctuary, at the holy table... "At each Ode takes place by the Priest, inside the Sanctuary, a Small Litany /At each ode by the Priest, inside the sanctuary, is sung a Small Litany/, -- is written in the Triodion, which also other litanies prescribes to the Priest. Finally, "inside" and "outside", differ only by one letter, therefore we see that copyists could easily make a mistake.
[^622]: According to the rubric of the Greek Triodion the kissing takes place thus: "The Priest takes the holy Gospel, and stands before the doors of the holy Sanctuary but the Superior having come, and having kissed the holy Gospel, and the Priest, receives it from his hands, and stands on the right of the Priest. Then the Brethren all, according to their order, kiss first the holy Gospel, then the Priest and the Superior, and stand also there where they happen to be, and kiss one another /The Priest takes the Holy Gospel and stands before the doors of the sanctuary. And the Abbot, having come and kissed the Gospel and the Priest, takes it from his hands and stands on the right side of the Priest. Then all brethren, according to their rank, kiss first the Gospel, and then -- the Priest and the Abbot, and stand there, where possible, kissing mutually/. According to the rubrics of our Pochaiv, Russian Triodia, Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon, the kissing first takes place in the sanctuary between the sacred ministers, then -- in the church, before the iconostasis, between clerics and elders, and at the end -- between the faithful and sacred ministers and between themselves. This is -- the rubric: "The kissing of the Superior with other priests and deacons in the holy altar takes place in this way: He who approaches says: 'Christ is risen', and he answers: 'Truly He is risen' and they kiss. Then the Superior, having taken the cross, stands outside before the holy royal doors, also all priests, as many as there be, and deacons, having taken each the Gospel and holy icons, according to their rank, stand in a row to the right of the Superior. Approach first the most worthy clerics and elders, one by one, and, bowing slightly before the Superior, kiss each the precious cross and Gospel which the Priest and images hold, and the Superior himself on the mouth, saying: 'Christ is risen', and he answers: 'Truly He is risen'. In such a way they kiss also the priests, and they themselves, in order, kiss among themselves, standing in a row to the right of the priests. After them similarly kiss also the faithful" (Moscow Typikon and Pochaiv Triodion 1786).
[^623]: The Synod of Lviv here, on p. 21 [→REF:p21], in the notes.
[^624]: So in our Sluzhebnyky, but in our and Russian Triodia is not prescribed "Shine", instead of "More honorable", nor, instead of "Glory to Thee, O Christ God, our hope", -- "Christ is risen" up to "trampling down death by death", with the response: "and upon those in the tombs bestowing life". Greek rubrics do not prescribe anything of this, nor the dismissal with the cross, but prescribe the dismissal "Who rose from the dead", as on Sunday (Roman Euchologion 1873, p. 79).
[^625]: Compare the rubric of the Sunday of Ap. Thomas in the evening with the rubric of Small Vespers of the Ascension of the Lord. About this also in the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople is written: "Many also after the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, ignoring, invoke the O Heavenly King Comforter, etc. in which this is not pardoned, our Savior being still on earth, except from the 1st of the Ascension, or from the first Pentecost, because at the third hour of this day descended the Holy Spirit... as from this therefore the invocation of the Comforter Spirit took beginning, from this day, which ceases from the day of the Resurrection until Pentecost. (On Monday of the Holy Spirit) /Many not considering, also after the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, read 'O Heavenly King, Comforter' etc., which -- is inadmissible, when our Savior will still be on earth until the first hour of the Ascension, or until the first hour of Pentecost, for at the third hour of this day descended the Holy Spirit... as, finally, from this began to invoke the Holy Spirit the Comforter, from that day, which ceases from the day of the Resurrection until Pentecost (On Monday of the Holy Spirit)/.
[^626]: So about "Christ is risen" in our Sluzhebnyky, except "We have seen", and in its place they have "Christ is risen", however, such is our custom and so in the Pochaiv Triodion of 1786... and in the Moscow Typikon of 1859... Ancient Greek rubrics prescribe "Christ is risen" only instead of "Blessed be the name" and instead of the psalm "I will bless the Lord", as in the Slavonic Typikon of the Lviv University. A later custom of the Greeks -- to sing "Christ is risen" after "Blessed is the Kingdom" three times and, instead of "We have seen the true light" and instead of "Blessed be the name of the Lord", -- three times. However, some of them, after "Blessed is the Kingdom" sing "Christ is risen" with its verses, as is given at the beginning of Resurrection Matins. The Moscow Typikon follows them, but the new Constantinopolitan Typikon does not go. What we said about the custom of the Greeks, we took from a description which we have from the island of Corfu, in which is written the following: "After 'Blessed is the kingdom' the Priest 'Christ is risen', and successively repeat it, first the right followed by the left choir; and this happens on all the days of Pascha until the Ascension. But on the great Sunday, and on those of the New Week we follow to sing it after its verses unchanged; as was said previously at Matins... Is sung successively 'Christ is risen' - as much on the great Sunday as on the remaining days of Pascha at 'With fear' instead of 'We have seen the light', and before the Dismissal three times flowingly instead of 'Blessed be the name', and at the end, at the Dismissal instead of 'Through the prayers' /After 'Blessed is the Kingdom' the Priest: 'Christ is risen', successively again repeat it: first -- the right, then -- and the left choir. And so it will be on all days from the Resurrection to the Ascension. But on the Great Sunday and on the days of Bright Week we continue to sing invariable this with its verses, as is taken at Matins... Successively is sung 'Christ is risen' on the Great Sunday as much as on the rest of the days of the Resurrection: at 'With fear', instead of 'We have seen the light' and before the dismissal three times flowingly, instead of 'Blessed be the name' and at the end, at the dismissal, instead of 'Through the prayers of our holy fathers'/.
[^627]: Tserkovne Oko gives this: "And at each exclamation or station! of the Gospel they strike in the church once the candela, the paraecclesiarch -- outside the church the great clapper and the great bell. At the last exclamation they strike all bells and the great clapper".
[^628]: "Then is read the Holy Gospel by the Patriarch, and by the holy High Priests (periodically in different dialects, as is customary) /Then is read the Holy Gospel by the Patriarch and by other hierarchs (by turn, in different languages, as is customary)/. New Constantinopolitan Typikon, on the day of Resurrection at Vespers.
[^629]: Or, as in the Triodion -- after the dismissal of the Liturgy.
[^630]: In the Rite of the Panagia, given in the Horologion before or after the 9th Hour, it is recounted how the apostles after Christ's Resurrection, before the dispersion throughout the whole world, stayed together in Jerusalem, having the custom to dine together and at this time to leave at the table an empty place, on which they placed a pillow, and on it -- : a piece of bread in Christ's portion, that is in memory of Jesus Christ, and after dinner they elevated the piece, saying: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God, help us"; from the Resurrection to the Ascension: "Christ is risen". When the apostles did this after the Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos, she appeared to them in the air alive, in light radiance, surrounded by angels, saying: "Rejoice, for I am with you all days". And they frightened, instead of "Glory to Thee, O Christ God", exclaimed "All-holy (Panagia) Theotokos, help us". This rite of the Panagia, named so from the name Panagia /All-holy/, by which the apostles invoked then the Most Holy Theotokos, imitating the apostles, was repeated once by the Emperor in the Court... and by people in churches or homes, and predominantly daily in monasteries, as is seen from the service of the meal, given in the Horologion, however, more solemnly -- in Bright Week, in which not a piece of bread, which they ate, but a whole (whole) bread they offered on all days of the week, not eating until Bright Saturday, but only kissing it. And this rite was initially served only at the meal, as it is in the Greek Pentecostarion. The Slavs, for the sake of greater solemnity, did not serve the whole rite only at the meal, but daily, throughout the whole Bright Week, preceded by lights and the icon of the Resurrection carried the Artos from the church to the meal and from the meal to the church, to the sounds of bells, as for Tserkovne Oko has our Pochaiv Triodion and Russian Typika. Today this rite is celebrated among us only in Bright Week and not with all prayers and rites, as the Triodion gives, but only as here, in the text, we gave, however, not only in monasteries, but also in all other churches. The prayers for the blessing and breaking of the Artos the Slavs added to themselves, for in Greek books they are not encountered; the prayer for breaking is not given even in Slavonic rubrics, except ours, but others break it without prayer.
[^631]: If a Bishop serves, we consider that he should begin Vespers in the sanctuary, censing before the holy table and from there read the verses, after which depart to his throne. And at "O Gladsome Light", after the blessing with the di- and trikirion he enters the sanctuary and from the holy doors reads the Gospel, after which returns to his throne.
[^632]: Some consider (among them also the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople) that throughout the whole Bright Week Vespers should begin not from "Blessed is our God", but from "Glory to the Holy", as Matins. However, they are mistaken, for in all editions which we have, is indicated clearly "Blessed is our God": "Blessed is our God"... and the Greek Typikon of Sabbas: "Signs crosswise with the censer, saying: 'Blessed is our God'" (On the Sunday of the Resurrection, at Vespers).
[^633]: The previous rubric at Vespers of Monday evening and other days of Bright Week is silent about sacred vestments. However, since on Monday, at the beginning of Matins, it clearly prescribes only the epitrachelion, then also at the beginning of Vespers it should be so. At the beginning, after Matins, in the Pentecostarion: "without however the priestly robe /probably without the priestly chasuble/; and the Typikon of the Lviv University, our Manuscript and Moscow Typika -- exactly so; similarly also our Pochaiv Triodion of 1786, however, adds: "or which is the custom where" and "in secular temples the Priest vests in vestments", that is in the phelonion. Tserkovne Oko prescribes also the phelonion.
[^634]: Regarding censing, our Triodion and the Moscow Typikon do not mention here any censing. However, the Greek Pentecostarion, our Manuscript Typikon, the Typikon of the Lviv University and Tserkovne Oko prescribe censing at the beginning of Matins only of the holy table and sanctuary, and at the beginning of the canon -- only of the temple and brethren, as usual. "It is necessary to know, that after the Priest blesses, while 'Christ is risen' is sung, he censes the holy Table, as usual, and all the Priesthood; at the beginning of the Canon he goes out, and censes the Temple, and the brothers, according to the accustomed order".
[^635]: According to the rubric of the Triodion the Artos is broken after the dismissal of the Liturgy, without prayer.
[^636]: For throughout this whole period the Flower Triodion where there will be "O Heavenly King", prescribes, instead of it, "Christ is risen" (3).
[^637]: Before "and to us He has granted life eternal" among us they sing "and upon those in the tombs bestowing life" three times. However, we do not meet this in any rubric. And the words "and to us He has granted life eternal" etc. we meet only in Slavonic Triodia, and only in Bright Week and at the Liturgy on the Apodosis of the Resurrection with the preceding "Christ is risen" (3).
[^638]: In the Triodion this is not present, only in our Liturgikon on the day of Resurrection at the Liturgy.
[^639]: So Tserkovne Oko and ours and the Russian Triodia; for the Greek Triodion and Slavonic, which we have, our Manuscript Typikon and the Typikon of the Lviv University prescribe "Christ is risen" only once, also on Sundays, except Bright Week.
[^640]: So our and Russian rubrics and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, also Tserkovne Oko -- on the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearers; in other rubrics -- nothing.
[^641]: Our Manuscript Typikon, on Easter at the Liturgy, and our Sluzhebnyky.
[^642]: Our Sluzhebnyky.
[^643]: Our and Russian Triodia and Tserkovne Oko.
[^644]: According to others -- Glory, Both now: "Thee, Who Art clothed with light".
[^645]: So the Greek Triodion and the Typikon of the Lviv University. According to Tserkovne Oko, our Manuscript Typikon and our Manuscript Triodion, before the Sessional Hymn -- Kondakion of the Resurrection, and according to ours and the Russian rubric, before the Sessional Hymn -- Kondakion-Ikos of the Resurrection.
[^646]: "More honorable" we do not sing until the Apodosis of the Resurrection on all Sundays (Our and Russian Triodia).
[^647]: So ours and Russian rubrics; if the saint does not have a troparion, then the Troparion "The noble Joseph" is sung, Glory: "When Thou didst descend", Both now: "The angel stood by the tomb".
[^648]: Moscow Typikon, fol. 363 verso. To a saint without Polyeleos nothing is taken, only to one with Polyeleos thus: at the 1st - "The noble Joseph", Glory: to the saint; at the 3rd - Sunday, Glory: to the saint; at the 6th - to the Myrrh-bearers, Glory: to the saint; at the 9th - again "The noble Joseph", Glory: to the saint. We suppose that, according to the previous rubric, should be taken thus: Troparion to the saint even without Polyeleos, if he has one. Among us today the saint without Polyeleos is limited to the 3rd and 9th Hours.
[^649]: Our Sluzhebnyky and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon prescribe the Kondakion to the Resurrection. Tserkovne Oko is silent here, however, prescribes it on the Sunday of Ap. Thomas.
[^650]: So in our and the Russian Triodia.
[^651]: Moscow Typikon, fol. 366 verso.
[^652]: Without the cross, -- prescribe our and the Russian Triodia. To begin the dismissal they prescribe from "Who rose from the dead"; according to our custom remains the dismissal of the Resurrection.
[^653]: Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe the Hours of the Resurrection. Our and Russian Triodia prescribe the usual Hours, and so it should be. Since in Greek rubrics there is nothing about this, we conclude that the Hours of the Resurrection should not be read.
[^654]: This is not in Greek, nor in Slavonic rubrics, with the exception of our Sluzhebnyky, it (the service of the Holy Trinity) in temples of the Most Holy Trinity is not good to reject.
[^655]: Generally, other rubrics do not prescribe: "immediately after the Liturgy", but "earlier", in the morning.
[^656]: In the Greek Triodion, after the petition "For the peace of the whole world", is given immediately a separate petition "For the people here present". Other editions do not give separate petitions.
[^657]: So among us, for the rubrics prescribe reading it from the altar... ours and Russian rubrics: from the altar, to the people.
[^658]: Since the last prayer "O God great and eternal" -- the eighth of the prayers that the Priest reads during the pre-introductory psalm, should remain there or here. The number of these prayers is a difference in various editions of Triodia. Our Pochaiv Triodion gives seven prayers, as does the Greek Triodion of the Propaganda. The Slavonic Manuscript Triodion, which we have, gives seven prayers, however, the prayer "O God great and eternal" it does not give, but gives another -- "O Master Almighty". Tserkovne Oko gives only four prayers: 1. "O Most Pure", after the Prokimenon; 2. After "Let us all say" -- "O Lord our God"; 3. and 4. After "Vouchsafe" -- "O Ever-flowing" and "O Heavenly King". The Moscow Typikon gives -- five: "O Most Pure", "O Lord Jesus Christ", and after "Vouchsafe" -- "O Ever-flowing" and the other two that are in the Triodion. The Typikon of the Lviv University and another manuscript one, which we have, mention in general only three prayers.
[^659]: The Lviv Triodion of 1746 gives, instead of "The Blameless", the Canon of the Holy Trinity. Sunday Midnight Office of the current tone (7th).
[^660]: Synod of Lviv, Title XI, 4. a.
[^661]: Synod of Lviv, Title IV, Chapter IV, part III, 8.
[^662]: Rubric of our Sluzhebnyky at the end of the Liturgy of Chrysostom.