# SYNODAL DECREES PART II: TITULI V–X (On the Liturgy, Sacred Furnishings, Monasteries, Seminaries, Priests, and Holy Sacraments)

### Model Text, Order, and Manner of Celebrating the Divine Liturgy

The model of the text, order, and manner of celebrating the Holy Liturgy of our Holy Fathers Basil the Great and John Chrysostom, sung and read, approved by the Provincial Synod of Lviv, held in the year 1891.

As the foundation serves the Slavonic text of the Holy Liturgy contained in the *Sluzhebnik* printed in the year 1866 in Lviv, at the Stauropegial Institute. As the foundation of the Latin text see: *Εὐχολόγιον sive Rituale Graecorum etc.*, illustrated by the labor of the Reverend Father Jacques Goar. Second edition in Venice, 1730.

The title is the very same as in the Slavonic text of the year 1866, only it is necessary to add:

"Of the Holy Eastern Catholic Church..." And thus the full title shall be the following: *"Liturgikon, that is to say Sluzhebnik, containing according to the order of the Holy Catholic Eastern Church the Liturgies of our Holy Fathers John Chrysostom, Basil the Great, and Gregory the Dialogist, Pope of Rome, with all the orders for Sunday, daily, and common of the Saints."* Further, on the following page instead of: *"With the blessing, etc."*, there shall stand: *"By command of the Provincial Synod of Lviv of the year 1891, held, and with the blessing of:*
*His Excellency the Most Reverend Sylvester Sembratovych, by the Grace of God, etc., likewise;*
*Of the God-loving Bishops: Julian Pelesz, Bishop, etc., and*
*Julian Kuylovsky, Bishop, etc."*
On the third page: *The Table of Contents, etc., remains the same.*

### The Order of the Divine Liturgy: The Proskomide & Entrance Prayers

*Note: The priest wishing to accomplish the Divine Mystagogy ought above all to have a good testimony of his own conscience, and to be reconciled with God by confession of sins and with all by love; likewise he ought according to his strength to have a heart clean from evil thoughts; and specifically he ought to abstain from midnight even unto the time of the sacred celebration entirely from all food and drink, under mortal sin.*

*Beside this, it is fitting beforehand to prepare for the Holy Liturgy by the reading of the prescribed prayers, and to be vested in priestly garments according unto the statutes of the canons of the Church. The time of the sacred celebration having arrived, the priest enters into the church, and having joined himself with the deacon (if there be one), and standing before the Royal Doors together with the deacon, makes three deep bows, and that in this manner:*

*Having joined the first three fingers of his right hand, he makes upon himself the sign of the holy cross, touching lightly the forehead, the breast, the right and the left shoulder; and turning toward the altar, he bows, reaching with the fingers of the right hand even unto the ground, and begins the customary prayers:*

The deacon (if there be one) saith:  
Bless, Master.

And the priest [saith]:  
Blessed is our God always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages.  
> **Deacon:** "Amen."
Then they say: Glory be to Thee, our God, glory be to Thee.  
O Heavenly King, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, who art everywhere and fillest all things, Treasury of blessings and Giver of life: come and abide in us, and cleanse us from every stain, and save our souls, O Good One.  
Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (3 times).  
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages.  
The deacon (if there be one): Amen.  
All-Holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse our sins. Master, pardon our transgressions. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities, for Thy name's sake.  
Lord, have mercy (3 times).  
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages.  
The deacon (if there be one): Amen. And: Our Father, who art in the heavens! Hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.  
> **Priest:** "For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages."
> **Deacon:** "Amen."
Troparia: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us; for, laying aside all defense, we sinners offer this prayer unto Thee as Master: have mercy on us. Glory: O Lord, have mercy on us; for in Thee have we put our trust. Be not exceedingly angry with us, neither remember our transgressions; but look upon us even now as Thou art compassionate, and deliver us from our enemies. For Thou art our God, and we are Thy people; we are all the work of Thy hands, and we call upon Thy name. Both now: Open unto us the door of tender mercy, O blessed Theotokos, that hoping in thee we may not perish

but that through thee we may be delivered from adversities; for thou art the salvation of the Christian race.

*After this the priest with the deacon (if there be one), having turned slightly with face and body toward the right side unto the Icon of the Savior, and signing themselves with the sign of the holy cross with the right hand, as was said above, make a moderate bow, reaching with the hand unto the knees, and saying:*

"Unto Thy most pure Image, etc." Slavonic Lit. page 299 (1) and Latin text Goar page 70.

*Likewise, having turned toward the left side unto the Icon of the Theotokos, signing themselves with the holy cross, they make a moderate bow, saying:*

"A fountain of tender mercy being, etc.": both texts as above [^152].

On pages 299 and 300 (1 and 2) of the Slavonic text it shall be thus:

*Turning unto the Holy Table and having bowed his head slightly, the priest saith this prayer:*

"O Lord, send down [Thy hand], etc."

*All these prayers he saith with joined hands (finger unto finger).*

The corresponding illustration of the joining of the hands shall be placed in the margin.

*After this they enter into the sanctuary, saying within themselves:*

"O God, be merciful unto me a sinner," and instead of: "O God, cleanse me, etc." as is in the Lviv Liturgikon.

Further, before the words: *"Then the deacon takes a blessing, etc."*: page 300 (2) of the Slavonic Liturgikon there shall be placed:

*"Having completed the prayers said before the Royal Doors, and having entered into the sanctuary through the deacon's doors, and standing before the steps of the Holy Table, they make three deep bows, ascend the steps, and standing beside the Holy Table, the priest kisses the Holy Gospel lying upon the Table, and the deacons (if there be such) the Holy Table."*

Note: As to the Psalm: "I will enter," although in certain Sluzhebniks it is found, nevertheless, since in our Sluzhebniks...

## 3. Scholarly Critical Apparatus & Footnotes

[^141]: Pastoral Letter of the Greek Catholic Metropolitan Ordinariate of Lviv, September 3, 1889, No. 639; reproduced in Appendix XXXI (*Додатокъ ч. 31*) of the Synodal Acts. On December 8, 1870, Pope Pius IX had declared St. Joseph the Patron of the Universal Church (*Quemadmodum Deus*); this was further amplified by Pope Leo XIII in his encyclical *Quamquam pluries* (August 15, 1889). By this synodal decree, the Ruthenian Church formally and officially adopted St. Joseph, Spouse of the Most Pure Virgin Mary, as a special Patron of the Ruthenian Church.

[^142]: Appendix XXXII (*Додатокъ ч. 32*) of the Synodal Acts: Decree of the Sacred Congregation *de Propaganda Fide*, May 29, 1887, No. 5, published throughout the ecclesiastical province and specifically promulgated in the Archeparchy of Lviv on December 4, 1887, No. 358 ord., establishing canonical and artistic norms governing the design, erection, and veneration of public roadside crosses and outdoor crucifixes.

[^143]: Luke 2:41 — "Now His parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the Passover" (Septuagint / Vulgate: *Et ibant parentes ejus per omnes annos in Jerusalem in die solemni Paschae*). The Synod adduces the annual pilgrimage of the Holy Family to the Jerusalem Temple as the divine scriptural prototype for popular Christian pilgrimages to sanctuaries and shrines.

[^144]: Pastoral Letter of the Greek Catholic Metropolitan Ordinariate of Lviv, February 3, 1884, No. 35. The Synod strictly prohibits Catholic faithful from undertaking pilgrimages to non-Catholic or dissident shrines, specifically singling out the Pochaiv Lavra in Volhynia and Suceava in Bukovina. The historic Basilian monastery of the Dormition at Pochaiv had united with Rome at the 1720 Synod of Zamość and flourished as a Greek Catholic pilgrimage center until its forcible confiscation in 1831 by Tsar Nicholas I and transfer to the Russian Orthodox Church; Suceava, preserving the relics of the Great Martyr John the New of Suceava, likewise stood under non-Catholic ecclesiastical administration.

[^145]: St. Alphonsus Maria de Liguori, *Silva de materia praedicabili* (*Selva di materia predicabile*), Part III: *De exercitiis missionum* (On the Exercises of Popular Missions). St. Alphonsus forcefully defends the immense spiritual fruits of parish missions against skeptical critics, demonstrating that missions break down inveterate feuds, enforce financial and moral restitution, root out deep-seated vices, rectify sacrilegious and invalid confessions, and instill a lasting holy fear of sin.

[^146]: St. Gregory the Great (Pope Gregory I), *Homiliae in Evangelia* (Homilies on the Gospels): *"Virtus enim boni operis est perseverantia"* ("For the virtue of a good work is perseverance" / "virtue is constancy in the good"). The Synod invokes St. Gregory to remind pastors that pastoral campaigns against drunkenness and social vices require unflagging steadfastness.

[^147]: 1 Tim. 5:8 — "But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel" (*Аще кто о своихъ паче же о присныхъ не промышляетъ, вѣры отверглся есть, и невѣрнаго горшій есть* / *Si quis autem suorum, et maxime domesticorum, curam non habet, fidem negavit, et est infideli deterior*).

[^148]: 1 Tim. 3:4–5 — "One that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity; for if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?" (*Свой домъ добрѣ правящу, чада имущу въ послушаніи со всякою чистотою. Ащеже кто своего дому не умѣетъ правити, како о Церкви Божіей прилѣжати можетъ?* / *Qui domui suae bene praesit: filios habens subditos cum omni castitate. Si quis autem domui suae praeesse nescit, quomodo ecclesiae Dei diligentiam habebit?*).

[^149]: St. John Chrysostom, *Homily VI on Genesis* (*In Genesim Homilia VI*), no. 2 (PG 53, 56–57): "Make thy home a church: for thou art accountable for the salvation both of thy children and of thy servants; and even as an account of you will be demanded of us, so an account for thy servant, for thy wife, and for thy child will be demanded of each of you" (*Дôмъ твôй здѣлай церквою...*).

[^150]: St. Augustine of Hippo, *Tractates on the Gospel of John* (*In Joannis Evangelium Tractatus*), Tractate LI, no. 13 (PL 35, 1768), commenting on John 12:26 ("If any man serve Me, let him follow Me"). St. Augustine defines the Christian father's household governance as an ecclesiastical and quasi-episcopal ministry (*ecclesiasticum et quodammodo episcopale munus*), admonishing, instructing, and guiding every member of the domestic church toward eternal salvation.

[^151]: St. Gregory the Great (Pope Gregory I), *Regula Pastoralis* (*Pastoral Care*), Part II, Chapter 1: *"Tantum debet actionem populi actio transcendere praesulis, quantum distare solet a grege vita pastoris"* ("The conduct of the prelate ought so much to excel the conduct of the people as the life of the shepherd is wont to be distinguished from the flock").

[^152]: Synodical rubrical reform to the *Order of the Divine Liturgy* (Entrance Prayers) in the Lviv *Sluzhebnik* (Stauropegion Institute edition of 1866, p. 299). The Synod decrees that the older rubrics prescribing that the clergy physically step over to kiss each sovereign icon (*Таже отходятъ къ Иконѣ Христовѣ* — and *Таже цѣлуютъ Икону Богородицы*) are eliminated / discarded, standardizing the ceremony to reciting the troparia (*Пречистому Твоему образу* and *Милосердія сущи источникъ*) while standing before the Royal Doors with a sign of the cross and moderate bow to the knees.

---

# Acts and Decrees of the Ruthenian Provincial Synod of Lviv (1891)

## 1. Titulus V: On the Holy Liturgy (Continued)

### Model Text, Order, and Manner of Celebrating the Divine Liturgy

in our Sluzhebniks it is not found, the priest omits it. *After this, having made a great prostration, they descend from the steps, and having bowed once more before the Holy Table, they depart unto the Prothesis [Table of Oblation].*

Next, as in the Slavonic Sluzhebnik, page 300 (2):  
*"Then the deacon takes a blessing, etc."*:  
"Bless, Master," etc., page 300 (2).  
"Blessed is God," etc., page 300 (2).  
*"After this they wash, etc."*, page 300 (2), Goar 57.  
"I will wash [my hands] among the innocent," etc., Goar 57.  
The words in the rubric: *"both saying one after the other"* are not needed, but shall be omitted, for each, the priest as well as the deacons, saith that prayer while washing.

Further, as to the vesting of the vestments, everything shall be observed as indicated on page 300 (2), with the following notes and changes regarding the order and manner:

All priestly vestments, as also the *Cincture [Belt]*, upon vesting are kissed, having previously blessed the same once crosswise (+).

The *Amice [Napleshnyk]* shall also be used, since anciently the Easterners also used it, as is proved by the words of Pope Benedict XIV: "The Maronites and Ambrosians place the amice over the sticharion" [^153].

Further, it is to be noted that first the *Epitrachelion* shall be put on, and then over it the *Cincture*; and as to the putting on of the Phelonion, the same is to be put on immediately, together with the other vestments before the Proskomide.

Therefore the note in the said Slavonic Liturgikon, page 301 (2): *"thus according to the Greek custom,"* etc., must be omitted, and the words: "Blessed is God Who pours out," for the Epitrachelion, shall be placed before the words: "Blessed is God Who girds me with strength," page 300 (2) of the Slavonic text pertaining to the cincture; and in the rubric: *"afterwards the priest (according to local custom)"*, those words in parentheses shall be completely omitted.

The vesting of the deacons shall take place thus: The first and second deacon, after the washing of hands, vest themselves, kissing each vestment: first the *Amice [Napleshnyk]*, then the *Sticharion*, next the *Cincture [Belt]*, then the *Epimanikia [Parakvytsi / Cuffs]* and the *Dalmatic*, and finally the *Orarion*. As to the *Orarion*, according to the custom adopted here, it shall be put on thus: One end of the orarion is taken and placed upon the left shoulder, letting the same hang down below the breast on the left side; the other end is passed across the back under the armpit of the right arm, and is brought over that very same left shoulder beneath the orarion hanging down in front, unto the back, so that the entire orarion when put on is like a crown [band/garland], resting upon the left shoulder, encircling the back and the breast, passing under the right armpit, having hanging ends or borders, one in front and the other behind the left shoulder.

There follows next on page 301 (3) of the Slavonic Liturgikon: *"Thus vested, the priest, etc."*, page 301 (3) of the Slavonic Liturgikon.

Next, the prayer: "Thou hast redeemed us..." Goar 5, which must be recited with joined hands.

Next, the *Proskomide [Preparation of the Oblation]*, as on page 301 (3) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, with the following notes and changes: The use of the *Lance [Kopiye]* shall be retained. As to the *Prosphora*, it is resolved to insert into the Sluzhebnik in the respective place, that is, before the words: *"Then he takes with the left hand..."*, page 301 (3) of the Slavonic text, the following note: *He takes five prosphoras, or three, or one. If there be none, it is lawful to take dried Lambs. The Lambs shall be cut out each week from a fresh prosphora by an ecclesiastical person; and if it be impossible each week, then more rarely, yet it is not lawful to use Lambs that have been preserved longer than one month.* — The prosphora itself shall be round, with the prescribed seal imprinted thereon; the *Lamb [Ahnets]* shall be four-cornered [square]. The constituent ingredients of the prosphora are: pure wheat flour, natural water, and leaven, and it shall be baked in the manner of ordinary bread. As to the placing of the particles, it is resolved to add unto the words of the Sluzhebnik: *"After this he takes the particle of the Theotokos saying, etc."*, page 301 (3) of the Slavonic text: *"if there be no particles, the priest may celebrate the Liturgy upon the Lamb alone."* When therefore there is no whole prosphora, but only the Lamb alone, then all "signings" with the lance, as well as the "thrustings" of the lance, shall be performed upon the Lamb itself.

There follows the pouring of wine and a little water into the chalice, that is, a few drops of water, it being understood of natural wine and pure natural water.

There follow the words, all as in the Liturgikon: "In honor and memory of our most blessed Lady, etc.", pages 301 and 302 (3 and 4) in the Slavonic text, compare Goar's text, page 58. Further, the words: "By the power of the precious and life-creating Cross, and the honorable heavenly Bodiless Powers," must be omitted from the Sluzhebnik, because in ancient copies those words are not found, and specifically in the Euchologion of Pope Benedict XIV [^154]; and besides, for the Precious Cross and the Angels particles are not extracted, because the particles placed upon the diskos represent the Church Triumphant (the Saints), the Church Suffering (the souls in Purgatory), and the Church Militant (the living faithful); while the Lamb represents Jesus Christ. — Therefore that prayer shall begin immediately with the words: "Of the honorable, glorious Prophet, Forerunner," etc., from page 302 (4) of the Slavonic Liturgikon text, Goar 58. It is resolved moreover, before the words: "Of the Hieromartyr Josaphat," to change the word "blessed" unto "holy," which is understood of itself after the canonization was promulgated [^155]—and to insert the commemoration of the holy Slavic Apostles: Cyril and Methodius before the holy Hieromartyr Josaphat.

Further, the rubric on page 302 (4) of the Slavonic text: *"Monks also add this: Concerning the most honorable, etc."* As to this rubric, that note pertains unto the entire section up unto the words: *"For Thy tender mercy, O all-good Master."* Therefore that prayer is read only by monastics, while secular priests omit it.

There follows in the Sluzhebnik, pages 302 and 303 (4 and 5) of the Slavonic text, the prayer: "O Lord Jesus Christ, receive this sacrifice, etc."; that prayer was inserted in recent times through abuse and altered; therefore in place thereof there shall be inserted here the following commemoration: "Remember, O Lord, Thy servants (N.)."

Next, everything follows according to the order on page 303 (5) of the Slavonic text. Incense is also placed into the censer with the prayer: "Incense unto Thee we offer," etc., see page 303 (5) of the Slavonic text and Goar 58. There follows on page 303 (5) of the Slavonic text and Goar 58. Then *"with the small veil"*, etc.

It is resolved regarding the veils: that all veils shall be retained, except the upper rigid veil, which, as shall presently be stated, shall be exchanged for a soft one. The veil for the chalice shall be square and rigid [stiffened], as is used among us in Galicia, and not soft and oblong as among the Greeks, because it is impractical and inconvenient; the larger veil wherewith the diskos is to be covered shall be soft, as among the Greeks.

Besides this, the pure linen *Iliton* shall be retained, according to our Ruthenian Galician custom, and not in place of the iliton the Antimension alone, as the present-day Greeks use; which Antimension shall be spread between the altar cloths, between the first upper cloth and the two lower altar cloths.

There follow the words: *"Then having taken the censer, etc."*, page 303 (5) of the Slavonic Liturgikon. That censing must not be omitted, as some do; but at the words: "Blessed is our God," etc., page 303 (5) of the Slavonic text, Goar 51, the priest shall cense the honorable Gifts crosswise, that is, with three swings: to the center, to the right, and to the left once—understood at a sung Divine Liturgy; at a spoken Liturgy the censing and the other ceremonies that are to be performed before the Royal Doors and in the Sanctuary before the Proskomide are omitted, and everything is done at the Table of Oblation privately, that is, not solemnly.

The rest of the Proskomide is as indicated in the Sluzhebnik, pages 303 and 304 (5 and 6) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar 51 (59), etc. If the Liturgy is sung, everything is left at the Table of Oblation upon the prothesis table, covered with the larger veil called the "Aer," as is prescribed in the Sluzhebnik. Only the beginning of the rubric, where it is said on page 304 (6) of the Slavonic Liturgikon: *"According to the local custom the Priest here puts on the Phelonion"*, must be omitted.

If, however, the Liturgy be spoken [read / Low Mass], then the Priest folds upon the chalice the purificator [lention / towel], upon the same the diskos, upon the diskos the folded asterisk, upon the asterisk the rigid veil, upon the veil the Aer folded in three, upon the same the iliton (if it doth not already lie upon the holy table, which upon the High Altar must always be located beneath the Gospel Book), upon that the soft veil, and the spoon, if anyone will be for Holy Communion,

and if the spoon doth not already lie upon the holy table. Thus folded together, the Priest carries everything, having taken the chalice with his left hand, and holding with his right hand the veil upon the top of the chalice, he goes forth unto the Altar where the Liturgy is to be celebrated; before which he bows, and having set the chalice upon it slightly to the side, he unfolds the Iliton, sets the chalice in the center thereof, takes the diskos, sets upon the same the opened asterisk, and places it on his left side and of the chalice upon the Iliton, and thus placed, he covers them with the spread-out Aer—as is indicated at the Prothesis (the Table of Oblation) during a sung Divine Liturgy.

As to the prayer on page 304 (6) of the Slavonic text, Goar 51 (59): "In the tomb with the body, etc.", that prayer is omitted.

If several priests concelebrate together, only one celebrates the Proskomide.

### The Order of the Divine Liturgy: Enarxis and Liturgy of the Word

*As to the Holy Liturgy Itself.*

After the completion of the Proskomide, if the Liturgy be sung, the Priest goes forth with the Deacons (if there be such); they stand before the holy altar [table of the Holy Mysteries], and having made there, all together, a profound bow with the hand reaching even unto the ground (it being understood, if the Liturgy is before an altar with the Holy Mysteries [the reserved Blessed Sacrament]; if however there be no Holy Mysteries, then with the hand unto the knees), they open the Royal Doors, and immediately the Priest, having blessed it, puts incense into the censer, and saying quietly the psalm: "Have mercy on me, O God," he censes, or, if there be Deacons, they cense.

The censing takes place in the following manner: If the Priest celebrates alone, he censes first the Holy Table from the front, then from the left side of the Sanctuary, that is, from his right side and from the east, then the Altarpiece Icon situated upon the wall, next the Holy Table from the left side (his left, but the right of the Sanctuary), and having bowed before the Holy Table, he goes forth into the Church and censes the Sovereign Icons: of the Savior, then of the Theotokos, and other icons if there be any, and having bowed again before the Holy Table, he turns toward the people and censes the Choirs and the people, and having bowed slightly, he returns into the Holy Sanctuary and hands over the censer.

If however there be Deacons, the Deacons cense the Holy Table from the front both together, then singly from both sides, and again together from the east as well as the Altarpiece Icon; they go forth through the deacons' doors into the Church, and having made again a bow before the Holy Table, each censes the holy Sovereign Icons and other icons from his side, and having bowed again before the Holy Table, they turn toward the people and each censes his own Choir, and then together the people, and having bowed slightly, they turn toward the Sanctuary, and having bowed, they return through the deacons' doors into the Sanctuary and hand over the censers.

If there be only one Deacon, he censes in that manner which was stated above concerning the Priest.

Standing before the Holy Table, the Priest with the Deacons (if there be such) bows profoundly, signs himself with the holy cross, as is indicated on page 305 (7) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, and saith: "Blessed is our God," page 305 (7), Goar 52.

There follows: *"Having joined hands..."* add: *"finger unto finger"*, as is depicted in the drawing, and the rest on page 305 (7) of the Slavonic text.

"Heavenly King," etc., Goar 52.

Then: "Glory to God in the highest," etc., page 305 (7) of the Slavonic text. Here it must be noted that after each "Glory to God in the highest, etc." he shall bow slightly once, and after: "O Lord, open Thou my lips," likewise one slight bow. Moreover it shall be added, that all this shall be recited secretly and without descending from the steps, as was hitherto in use, but all this takes place before the Holy Table itself. After the words: "O Lord, open Thou my lips," the Priest kisses the Holy Gospel, and the Deacons kiss the Holy Table. Therefore the rubric of the Sluzhebnik on page 305 (7) of the Slavonic text shall accordingly be corrected: *"and the Priest kisses the holy, etc."* There follows the mutual prayer or dialogue of the Priest with the Deacons (if there be any), which is to be done at the beginning of the Divine Liturgy with the words: "It is time for the Lord to act; Master, bless," etc., page 306 (8) of the Slavonic text, Goar 52.

Thereafter the Deacons, having bowed profoundly before the Holy Table, go forth, each through his own door, holding the orarion with the first three fingers of the right hand, with the left hand placed upon the breast, before the Royal Doors, and having bowed there

profoundly toward the Holy Sanctuary, they depart, turning sideways (toward one another) unto the center unto the place designated for the Deacons, that is, opposite the Royal Doors in the center, a few paces down from the Royal Doors; here, when all have taken their places, the first Deacon proclaims, raising with his right hand the end of the Orarion unto the height of his shoulder: "Bless, Master" (Goar 52). The Priest, standing in the center before the Holy Table, signs himself with his hand, and not with the Holy Gospel, proclaiming: "Blessed is the Kingdom, etc.", page 306 (8), Goar page 52.

There follows the Ecteny: "In peace let us pray unto the Lord," Goar ibid., by the first Deacon. The Priest and all the other concelebrating Priests recite the Ectenies and the prayers secretly, omitting nothing; and that not only in thought, but also with concentration of the Spirit, articulating distinctly with the lips, as is wont to be done at a spoken Liturgy when the server must answer.

As to the Ecteny: "In peace let us pray unto the Lord," etc., everywhere the Slavonic word: "Pomolimsya" shall be used with the stress upon the final "i", and not upon "o"—and it shall not be written with "yat" (ѣ), because here the word "pomolimsya" corresponds unto the Greek imperative; and therefore everywhere, where it corresponds unto the Greek imperative, in the Old Church Slavonic language the accent must be placed upon the final *i* (и́). "Pomólimsya" with the accent upon the "ó" would be indicative, while "pomolěmsya" with "yat" (ѣ) would be Little Russian [Ukrainian] or Russian imperative. In like manner also "Predadým" with the accent upon "ý" (и́) and not "yat" (ѣ).

There follows after the Ecteny the exclamation, which the presiding Priest shall sing: "For Thine is the kingdom, etc.", page 308 (10), Goar page 53.

The singers sing the *Antiphons; on Sunday, the Sunday ones:* "Shout joyfully unto the Lord..." *on weekdays:* "It is good to give praise," etc., *on Feast Days—the feast-day ones.* It is resolved that *Antiphons* and not the *Typika [Izobrazitelni]* shall be used in secular Churches and in monastic parish Churches; while in non-parochial monastic Churches, the *Typika* shall be used.

The Priest reads the prayer of the first Antiphon: "O Lord our God," etc., page 308 (10) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar 53. The Priest—or if there be more of them, the concelebrating Priests—

shall read all prayers distinctly in secret, and that after, and not before the exclamations, as is set down in some sluzhebniks. — The Deacons during the singing of the Antiphons remain in their places waiting.

There follows the second Ecteny, page 308 (10), Goar page 53, which the second Deacon sings, if there be one. Then the second exclamation: "For Thine is the dominion, etc.", page 308 (10) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 53, which the second Priest shall sing, if there be several concelebrating together.

There follows the *prayer of the second Antiphon* and the *second Antiphon*, and after this: "Glory be to the Father, etc." and "Only-Begotten Son, etc.", page 309 (11) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 86 (at the end).

The Deacons at "Only-Begotten Son..." do not enter into the sanctuary unto the Priest, but standing in their place, they bow together with the Priest standing at the holy table at the words: "Glory be to the Father: and Now:" and at "and was incarnate," page 309 (11) of the Slavonic Liturgikon text.

There follows the *third Ecteny*, by the first Deacon, since the Deacons sing the Ectenies alternately, page 309 (11) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 53. Then the exclamation: "For good and man-befriending art Thou, O God, etc.", page 310 (12) and Goar 54.

Next: the *prayer of the third Antiphon*: "Thou Who hast given us these common [and concordant prayers]..." page 310 (12) and Goar page 54; the *third Antiphon* and the *prayer*: "Master, Lord our God," page 310 (12) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 54. Priests shall always keep their hands joined together near the breast during the prayers, as is indicated in the sluzhebniks and represented in the depiction in the margin.

After the third Ecteny the Deacons enter through their doors into the Sanctuary, bow profoundly, whereafter the Priest hands the Gospel Book unto the first Deacon, and the second takes the censer, and together with the preceding candle-bearers they make the *Small Entrance*, circumambulating around the Sanctuary from the right side and exiting through the northern door; and having arrived before the Royal Doors, the Deacon gives the Holy Gospel to be kissed by the Collator [Patron of the church] (if there be one), then unto the people standing closest, then comes unto the Priest, and having bowed his head, saith softly: *Bless, Master, the holy entrance.* Goar page 54.

The Priest *blesses with his hand toward the east*, saying: "Blessed is the entrance, etc.", page 311 (13), Goar page 54. When a Bishop is present, He himself blesses the entrance and kisses

the Holy Gospel. Then the Deacon, standing somewhat higher, that is, before the Priest, and before the first Deacon the second Deacon, if there be one, and the Deacon holding the Holy Gospel raises it slightly aloft and proclaims: "Wisdom! Stand upright!" Goar page 54, and having entered into the Sanctuary, he places the Gospel upon the holy table—and the singers sing: "Come, let us worship, etc.", page 311 (13), Goar page 91.

At a spoken Divine Liturgy the Priest expresses the entrance thus: standing at the Holy Table he makes the sign of the cross before himself with his right hand, saying: "Blessed is the entrance, etc."

There follow the troparia and kontakia, and the Priest reads secretly the prayer of the Trisagion, having his hands joined at the breast: "O holy God, etc.", page 311 (13) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 55. There follows the exclamation: "For holy art Thou...", page 312 (14) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 55.

At that Exclamation, according to the local custom hitherto observed, the Priest shall at the words: "Now and forever" turn toward the people, extending his hands; likewise also the Deacon, raising slightly with the three fingers of his right hand the end of the Orarion, facing the people, proclaims the words of the conclusion of the exclamation: "And unto the ages of ages."

If there be no Deacon, then the Priest himself in his stead proclaims the second part of the exclamation from the words: "Now and forever, and unto the ages of ages," blessing the people with his hand.

After the Trisagion, the Priest with the Deacons descends before the steps of the Holy Table, they make a profound bow, as was said above, and here the Deacons change their position (place), that is, the one on the right side of the Priest passes unto his left side, and the one on the left unto the right, and they go behind the Holy Table.

There the junior Deacon or Subdeacon, passing around the Holy Table from the right side unto the left side of the Sanctuary, exits through the northern deacons' door into the Church and stands before the Royal Doors; while the other, that is, the senior Deacon, remains at the right hand of the Priest until the conclusion of the Epistle.

*Note:* The Priest goes out from before the Holy Table following the Deacon on the right side behind the Holy Table, saying the prayer: "Blessed is He that comes..." and stands upon the High Place (that is, one deacon on the right, the other on the left side of the Holy Table,

and the Priest following the Deacon on the right side of the Holy Table, saying secretly: "Blessed is He that comes...", remains upon the High Place, having on his right hand the first Deacon, while in the meantime the other, having gone out through the northern doors into the Church and proceeded unto the place of reading, having made a bow, reads the Epistle there).

If the Divine Liturgy be concelebrated, that is, wherein several Priests concelebrate together, then in like manner the Priests forming the right wing pass unto the left, and those forming the left wing unto the right, standing at the High Place, and after the Epistle they likewise change places behind the holy table and return unto their places before the holy table.

Then the first Deacon proclaims, holding with the first three fingers of his right hand the Orarion raised slightly aloft: "Let us attend!" Goar page 55. The Priest: "Peace be unto all," Goar 55, turning from the right side toward the people and making over them the sign of the cross; and the second Deacon, if there be one, but if not, that same deacon: "Wisdom! Let us attend!" Goar page 55. The Choir: The Prokeimenon.

Then: "Wisdom!" by the first Deacon, while in the meantime the second is already before the Iconostasis in the accustomed place, awaiting the time of the reading of the Epistle, and at the "Wisdom!" of the first Deacon, he proclaims the title of the Epistle, and again the first Deacon: "Let us attend!", and the second begins the reading of the Epistle; when there is only one Deacon, the reader or singer reads the Epistle, and the Deacon proclaims: "Wisdom!", and then: "Let us attend!", page 313 (15).

During the Epistle the Priest sits upon the High Place.

After the reading of the Epistle the Priest saith: "Peace be unto thee," Goar 55, and the Deacons assemble with the Priest before the steps of the Sanctuary, make a profound bow, and the Priest puts incense into the censer when the Deacons have said: "Bless, Master, this incense," Goar 55, with the brief prayer: "Incense unto Thee we offer," Goar page 55, etc., and they cense on all sides around the Holy Table, the Icons, and the people, as indicated at the beginning. The Choir: "Alleluia."

The Priest, when the Deacons—or the Deacon, if there be one—have censed the front part of the Holy Table, ascends the steps of the table, makes a profound bow, and reads the prayer of the Gospel: "Cause to shine in our hearts, etc.", Goar page 74,

page 313 (15) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, having his hands joined at the breast for each prayer, as was stated above. When there are Deacons, the Priest doth not cense here. — After the censing the Deacons approach the Holy Table, bow low, and upon the conclusion of the hymn "Alleluia" the first Deacon proclaims, standing at the holy table and turned slightly toward the Priest, while the second Deacon holds from the left side the Sluzhebnik inclined toward the Priest (which must already be found there from the beginning): "Bless, Master, etc.", Goar page 55, having uttered the name of the Evangelist in the genitive case, that is: of Matthew, of Mark, of Luke, of John.

The Priest, blessing the Deacon crosswise with his hand, proclaims: "May God, through the prayers, etc.", page 314 (16), Goar 55.

At the words: "Wisdom! Stand upright!", the Priest hands the Holy Gospel unto the Deacon, who takes it with both hands, and having made together with the second Deacon a bow before the Holy Table, they depart with the candle-bearers preceding them unto the place of reading of the Holy Gospel; the Deacon carrying the Gospel goes forth through the Royal Doors, while the second Deacon and the candle-bearers go forth through the northern door and receive the Deacon carrying the Gospel before the Royal Doors; that place is before the iconostasis on the northern side, that is, before the Icon of the Most Holy Theotokos, with face turned toward the south (midday). If there be two Deacons, then the Priest proclaims: "Wisdom! Stand upright!", etc., see page 314 (16) of the Slavonic Liturgikon. Here it is noted that the Deacon goes forth for the reading of the Holy Gospel through the middle, that is, Royal Doors, and returns into the Sanctuary through those same doors, because the Deacon holds in his hands the Holy Gospel, which represents Christ Himself. If there be no Deacon, the Priest himself sings the Gospel from the Royal Doors, turned toward the people, and reads there the Holy Gospel placed upon an analogion or supported by one of the altar servers. After the reading of the Gospel, the Deacons give the same unto the Priest, who stands in the Holy Doors from the side of the Sanctuary, in the very middle of the doors, to be kissed, at the beginning of the reading, that is, on the side where the Gospel begins; and if there be several Gospels, at the beginning of the first.

At a spoken Divine Liturgy the Priest reads the Gospel always facing from the Sanctuary toward the people; and where the custom exists that the people place their heads beneath the Gospel, the Gospel is read from the Royal Doors; — it is better in both cases to read from the Doors when there are hearers, because for laymen to enter into the sanctuary through the Royal Doors is not permitted according to the custom of the Greeks.

The Priest, about to kiss the Holy Gospel, saith unto the Deacon: "Peace be unto thee (who announcest good tidings)," Goar page 56 (misprinted 64); when a Bishop is present, He is the first to kiss the Gospel. Then the Priest receives the Holy Gospel from the Deacon and places the same upon the Iliton upon the holy table. The Deacons return through their doors for the singing of the ecteny: "Let us all say," Goar page 56. Here it must be noted that, as everywhere, the Greek Optative ought to stand, which Optative is rendered in the Slavonic tongue by the imperative (more properly the Greek conditional): "Hospodu pomolýmsya" and not "pomólimsya" or "pomolěmsya"—just so here: "Rtsim vsi" (Рцѣмъ вси) and not "Rtsem vsi" (Рцемъ вси).

Next, the Ecteny: "Have mercy on us, O God...", Goar page 56, and immediately after those words the prayer: "O Lord our God," Goar page 56, and not lower down after the words: "Furthermore let us pray for the Most Holy," Goar page 56, because in the most ancient and best copies that prayer is placed before the particular commemoration of persons, and because the sense of this prayer itself indicates the same. Next, everything follows in order as on page 315 (17), etc., Goar page 56. There follows the Ecteny: "Pray, ye catechumens, unto the Lord," page 316 (18), Goar page 56; and at the words: "that He may reveal unto them the Gospel of righteousness," Goar page 56, the Priest raises the Gospel, and having kissed it, sets it on his right side to the side (better in the middle, if there be sufficient space near the tabernacle); the rest on pages 316 and 317 (18 and 19) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar pages 56 and 57.

Next, the Ecteny: "As many as are catechumens, depart!" Goar page 57; the second continues further: "Ye catechumens, depart!", and again the first: "As many as are catechumens, depart!", and the second concludes: "Let none of the catechumens [remain]", etc., page 317 (19), Goar page 57.

The Priest during that Ecteny: "As many" unfolds at a sung Divine Liturgy the Iliton upon the holy table, which until now lay folded beneath the Gospel Book. There follows the pray-

### The Liturgy of the Faithful, Great Entrance, and the Eucharistic Anaphora

-er: "We thank Thee, O Lord God, etc.", pages 317 and 318 (19 and 20), Goar page 57. At the exclamation: "That being kept under Thy dominion...", page 319 (21), Goar page 58, the Priest doth not turn around at "Now and forever, etc.", as was in use among us, yet without reason and contrary to the rubrics of ancient Liturgikons, but concludes the entire exclamation facing the Holy Table. Only after the exclamation, when the Deacons have assembled, doth the Priest descend before the steps, and puts incense with a blessing into the censer; when the Deacons have said: "Bless, Master, this incense," the Priest saith: "Incense unto Thee we offer, etc.", as was stated above, and they cense according to custom. If there be no Deacons, then the Priest himself after the prayer: "None is worthy, etc.", pages 319 and 320 (21 and 22), Goar page 58, descends before the steps, and having blessed the incense, censes. If the Deacons cense, then after censing the Holy Table, they cense the Priest, as the Greek Euchologia prescribe.

As to the Cherubic Hymn, that shall be translated from the Greek: "We who mystically represent the Cherubim..." Goar page 92 unto the end, rendered thus: *We who mystically represent the Cherubim, and sing the thrice-holy hymn unto the Life-Creating Trinity, let us now lay aside all earthly cares: As receiving [bearing up] the King of all, invisibly attended [borne aloft] by the angelic ranks. Alleluia.* And although in the latest edition of the Benedictine Euchologion printed in Rome it stands: "That we may receive the King of all," etc. [^156], which alteration the editors of this Euchologion permitted themselves according to the custom of certain innovators, nevertheless in the first edition that hymn is not found in its entirety, but only the opening words are cited: "Οἱ τὰ Χερουβίμ"; therefore according to the above-mentioned text the Slavonic translation of that hymn on page 321 (23) shall be emended.

After the censing the Deacons return through their doors into the sanctuary, and having bowed profoundly before the steps of the Holy Table, they go forth unto the Priest at his sides; and having taken the censers, they place the rings thereof upon the thumb of the left hand, and having raised their hands, they recite together with the Priest the Cherubic Hymn three times, signing themselves with the cross at each "Alleluia," pages 320, 321 (22, 23).

After reciting the Cherubic Hymn they do not kiss the holy table, as the rubric prescribes on page 321 (23), but having

bowed profoundly before the Holy Gifts in the tabernacle, they descend before the Holy Table, and there the Priest takes the censer from the first Deacon, and before his departure censes the Holy Table only from the front; all depart: first the Deacons, behind them the Priest unto the Table of Oblation [Prothesis]; having arrived there, they bow slightly, and the Priest having censed the prepared gifts, hands the censer unto the Subdeacon (the second Deacon), who places it upon his ring finger, that is, the second finger from the smallest; and the priest himself saith: "O God, be merciful unto me a sinner," Goar page 58, striking his breast, and then taking the Aer, saith: "In peace lift up [your hands]", etc., Goar page 58, Old Liturgikon 321 (23), and hands the same unto the second Deacon (the Subdeacon), who takes it with the first two fingers of both hands by both corners, that is, edges, with the left side toward himself and the right outward; then the Priest takes the diskos with the asterisk opened upon it and gives it, with an underlying towel folded in two or three if it be wide, unto the Deacon, so that he may hold the diskos raised aloft near his forehead with both hands by means of the towel, holding at the same time with his left hand the end of the orarion on both sides. The Priest himself takes the chalice covered with the veil, and they go forth through the northern door one after the other, preceded by candle-bearers: and that first the Subdeacon, then the Deacon, Priests if there be concelebrants, and at the end the presiding Priest with the chalice; when the Deacon comes unto the northern door, he proclaims unto the people: "All you Orthodox Christians may the Lord God remember in His Kingdom," etc., Goar page 59, page 321 (23); in like manner, if there be two Deacons, then the second and the other concelebrants at a concelebrated Liturgy proclaim the same commemoration; and finally the presiding Priest proclaims: "Our Most Holy Universal Pontiff, etc.", page 321 (23), walking slowly until he hath finished the entire commemoration; entering into the Sanctuary through the central (Royal) Doors, the Deacons await the Priest, standing, one with the Aer and the other with the diskos, within the Royal Doors before the steps, face to face with each other and sideways to the Holy Table; and then joining with the Priest, they enter together unto the Holy Table; here the Priest sets the Holy Chalice upon the Iliton on the right side, then receives from the first Deacon the diskos and sets the same with the opened

asterisk upon his left side; then he takes the Aer from the other Deacon or Subdeacon, and having made with it a cross over the censer as if censing it, he covers with it the Holy Gifts, already covered with their own veils, that is, the chalice with the stiffer veil, and the diskos with the asterisk with the soft veil, saying: "The noble Joseph, etc.", Goar 57, Old Liturgikon 322 (24); and then having received the censer from the second Deacon or Subdeacon, he censes the covered Holy Gifts three times crosswise, saying: "Do good, O Lord, in Thy good pleasure unto Zion, etc.", Goar page 59, Slavonic Liturgikon text page 322 (24).

*Note:* If there are not two Deacons, but only one Deacon, then the Priest places upon the Deacon's left shoulder the Aer folded in three and the censer, and then gives the diskos with the asterisk opened into his hands, as was stated above. If there be no Deacon at all, then the Priest himself takes the Aer folded in three upon his left shoulder, and the veil from the chalice he places beneath the chalice, and sets the diskos with the asterisk opened upon the chalice, and thus makes the Great Entrance according to what was said above, preceded by candle-bearers, one or two if there be such, of whom one carries also the censer.

At a spoken Divine Liturgy, at the words: "All you Orthodox Christians," the Priest doth not descend, but turns in a full circle at the Holy Table, beginning from the left side, so that he may at least in part express the entrance. Then the Priest inclines slightly toward the Deacon and saith in a quiet voice: "Remember me, brother and concelebrant, etc.", page 322 (24); part of this commemoration is found in Goar, pages 81 and 59. Upon the conclusion of the commemorations the Deacons depart, as indicated above, unto their place, and one of them sings the Ecteny: "Let us complete our prayer unto the Lord," etc., Goar page 59, Liturgikon page 323 (25).

Here it must be noted, that in the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great, in the prayer after "Let us complete": "O Lord our God," Liturgikon page 361, in place of the Slavonic word "vizhd" [look down / behold] there shall stand "prisiti" [visit].

After the Priest's exclamation: "Through the compassions of Thine Only-Begotten Son, etc.", Goar page 60, Liturgikon 324 (26), the Priest turns toward the people and blesses once with the words: "Peace be unto all," and turns back in a half-circle, facing the Holy Table. The Deacon proclaims: "Let us love

one another," Goar page 60. The Deacons kiss each other mutually on the left shoulders. The Priest kisses the Holy Gifts covered with the Aer: first the top of the diskos, then the top of the chalice, and finally the edge of the holy table before him on the right side of the chalice, saying at each kissing: "I will love Thee, O Lord, my strength, etc.", Goar page 60, Liturgikon page 324 (26). If the Divine Liturgy be concelebrated, then the presiding Priest kisses on the left shoulder the first Priest standing on the right side, and then the first on the left, who in the very same manner convey the kiss unto the other Priests standing by on both sides. Next the Deacon proclaims: "The doors! The doors! [In wisdom let us attend!]", etc., Goar page 60, Liturgikon page 324 (26); at which words the Priest raises the Aer aloft, taking it by both upper corners, and holds it above the Gifts—properly speaking not above the Gifts, but before the Gifts, somewhat higher than his eyes, more or less level with the height of his forehead, saying: "I believe..." At the words: "and was incarnate," he bows, lowering the Aer slightly over the Holy Table. Upon the conclusion of the Symbol of Faith the Priest makes the sign of the cross three times before himself with the Aer, saying: "Holy God, etc.", page 325 (27); then he folds the same in three, and having kissed it, sets it aside on the right side of the chalice at the edge of the Iliton.

The Deacon proclaims: "Let us stand well, etc.", Goar page 67, Liturgikon 326 (28), whereafter the Deacons enter into the Sanctuary in the usual manner, while the Priest proclaims: "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.", Goar page 60, Liturgikon page 326 (28); here the priest turns and blesses the people once; in case, however, a Bishop is present, He blesses the people unto three sides with the trikirion and dikirion.

Further: "Let us lift up our hearts" [Horí imiyím serdtsá — let us have], and not "imíyem"; here the Priest raises his hands aloft not much higher than his head, and at "Let us give thanks unto the Lord" [Bilahodarým Hospodá] he lowers his hands down, joining them together; the Deacons and the other concelebrants do the same. One ought to say *bilahodarým* (we give thanks) and not *blagodarěm*. There follows the spreading of hands and the prayer: "It is meet and right, etc.", page 326 (28), Goar 60. Next the Priest proclaims: "Singing the triumphant hymn, etc.", Goar 61, page 327 (29). At "the triumphant hymn," the Deacon takes in his right hand the right side of the asterisk and touches

with it the diskos above, below, from the left and right sides, whenever the words are proclaimed by the Priest: "singing, crying aloud, shouting, and saying" (Goar 61).

During these actions of the Deacon, as also during the consecration of the Holy Gifts, for convenience and to avoid overturning the holy chalice, the diskos may be placed slightly in front of the chalice; otherwise the diskos lies on the left side of the chalice.

There follows: "Holy, [Holy, Holy]", etc., Goar 61, page 327 (29); at the words: "Blessed is He that comes," Goar 61, the Priest signs himself crosswise with the asterisk, kisses it, and gives it to be kissed unto the concelebrating Priests and Deacons, if there be such.

There follows the rubric: *"Here the Priest, etc."*, page 327 (29); here in this rubric there shall also be recalled unto the one celebrating the Divine Liturgy the renewal of intention and of contrition or remorse. Then the prayer with spread hands: "With these [blessed powers], we also, etc.", page 327 (29), Goar 61.

Here it is noted, that in this prayer: "With these blessed powers, etc.", in the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great, pages 366 and 367, in place of: "and Thou didst turn away" [i otvratil yesi] there shall stand "and Thou didst bring back" [i vozvratil yesi]; further, in that very same prayer in the Liturgy on page 368, in place of the words "unto the resurrection from the dead" where the Greek text hath *ὁдоποιήσας τὴν Ἀνάстаσιν*, in place of the Slavonic rendering "Having made way for the resurrection" [Putesotvoryvyi voskreseniye], which is not sufficiently intelligible, there shall stand: "Unto that which is the resurrection from the dead" [K' yezhe iz mertvykh voskreseniyu] [^157], which is to be understood thus: "and having risen on the third day and made a way for all flesh unto the resurrection from the dead."

Further, at the words: "Taking bread, etc.", 329 (31), Goar 61, the Priest takes the diskos with the prepared bread into his left hand—thus shall the rubric on page 329 (31) be corrected—raises the same slightly aloft, and inclining his head when he pronounces: "having given thanks," Goar 61, then blesses the Lamb upon the diskos three times with his right hand, saying: "and having blessed + sanctified + broken + gave... etc.", page 329 (31), Goar 61; he sets the diskos in its place, and *"forthwith bowing down, looking upon the prepared bread, etc."*, page 329 (31). After the words: "Take, eat," Goar 61, the Priest with the Deacons bows profoundly, reaching with the hand even unto the ground; likewise also afterwards at the consecration of the chalice, page 329 (31). During the blessing the bells shall be rung, as

also above during the hymn (Holy), and then all, except the celebrant (celebrants) and Deacons, shall bend their knees without distinction.

Here it is to be noted, that the words of transubstantiation of the Holy Gifts: "This is [My Body]..." and "This is [My Blood]...", shall be distinctly pronounced and without change. There follows the prayer secretly with extended hands: "Remembering therefore, etc.", page 330 (32), Goar page 61; and upon the conclusion thereof, if the Priest celebrates alone, he himself raises with his right hand the diskos, and with his left the chalice, crossing his hands crosswise, the right over the left, and raises both slightly aloft, proclaiming: "Thine own of Thine own, etc.", page 330 (32), Goar page 72. If there be only one Deacon, then he raises the Holy Gifts crosswise, as was said above concerning the Priest, while the Priest standing in his place proclaims: "Thine own of Thine own..." If both Deacons be present, then both raise them crosswise: the left having taken the chalice with his right hand, and the right having taken the diskos with his right hand, so that the right hand of the right Deacon rests upon the right arm of the left Deacon; then having set down the Holy Gifts upon the holy table in their place, they bow low even unto the ground; then, when the first Deacon hath covered the chalice with its veil, he himself bows profoundly again, which is to be observed also as many times as the Deacon covers or uncovers the Holy Gifts, assisting the Priest in that office (it being understood that the Deacon, when standing beside the Priest, always covers and uncovers the Holy Gifts with the veils).

There follows the prayer: "Furthermore we offer, etc.", 330 (32), Goar 62. Next the troparion: "O Lord, Who didst send down Thy All-Holy Spirit, etc.", pages 330, 331 (32, 33), Goar 62, which the Priest recites with hands spread and slightly raised aloft, together with the Deacon, bowing after each conclusion thereof at the verses: "Create in me a clean heart," Goar 62; next at "Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me," Goar 76, a second bow; and a third after the threefold conclusion of that troparion. The Fathers resolved to omit the critical note regarding that invocation [^158] and to leave everything according to the present custom and rubrics of the Liturgies.

There follows next the continuation of the preceding prayer: "Furthermore we offer, etc.", 331 (33). The prayer: "That [they may be] unto those who partake

[for the vigilance of soul]...", page 331 (33), and the second prayer: "Furthermore we offer unto Thee, etc.", page 331 (33). After it the Priest takes the incense, puts it with a blessing into the censer, and censes the Holy Gifts three times crosswise, and hands the censer unto the Deacon, who together with the second Deacon, if there be one, censes—the Priest having stepped slightly aside unto the left—the holy table from the front, and then likewise the Holy Table from its four sides and nothing more; then they approach the Holy Table unto their sides. The Priest reads the prayer: "For the holy Prophet, Forerunner [and Baptist John]" (of Saint John), etc., Goar 63, Liturgikon page 332 (34); which prayer must be emended as to the Slavonic text, because there is an incorrect translation from the Greek in later editions, and in place of: "Of Saint John [genitive]", etc., there shall stand in the Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom: "Concerning holy John [locative]", etc.; and in the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great there shall stand: "With holy John [instrumental]", and not "Of Saint John, etc.", page 372; for although in the Greek text that case is required by the preposition *ὑπέρ* in the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, and *μετά* (with) in the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great, which prepositions govern the genitive case, yet in the Slavonic text "o" governs the seventh case (locative) and "s" governs the sixth case (instrumental) as also in the Latin tongue (*pro* and *cum*) [^159]. This also is to be noted here, that it is better to write "o svyátim" (о святѣмъ) and not "o svyátom" (о святомъ). In like manner, in adjectives in the dative/locative singular of all genders at the end there shall be placed "ѣ" (yat) and not "o": "O Presvyatěy" (О Пресвятѣй) and not: "O Presvyatoy" (О Пресвятой). It is noted here, that if there be no Deacon or Deacons, then at "Especially" [Izryádno], Goar 62, the Priest censes only the Holy Gifts and nothing more.

There follows next the said prayer: "Concerning holy John, etc.", page 332 (34), Goar 63.

Then the Priest proclaims: "Among the first remember, O Lord, etc.", page 333 (35), Goar 63. Next there follows the prayer of commemorations for the living: "Remember, O Lord, this city, etc.", page 333 (35), Goar 63. There follows the exclamation: "And grant us [with one mouth and one heart to glorify]...", page 333 (35), Goar 63; after which the Deacons, having bowed profoundly, depart unto their places for the Ecteny: "Having commemorated all the saints," Goar 64, which they sing after the exclamation of the Priest: "And may the mercies [of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ be with you all]", page 334 (36), Goar 64, at which exclamation the Priest

who is celebrating turns only from the side and blesses the people. The Priest then, having inclined his head slightly, reads the prayer: "Unto Thee we commend [our whole life and hope]...", page 334 (36), Goar 64, and the exclamation after the ecteny: "And make us worthy, O Master...", page 335 (37), Goar 64. Here at the "Our Father," Goar 64, the Priest spreads his hands, raising them slightly, more or less unto the height of the head, and recites the Lord's Prayer; the Deacons, however, already here at the "Our Father" cross the orarion crosswise, so that the girded orarion forms a cross upon the back and upon the breast, and both ends are tucked under the girding from the front in the middle of the orarion; and that takes place thus: The Deacon, with the assistance of the second Deacon or server, takes the end of the orarion hanging down from the left shoulder, holds the same below the breast in front, and then girds the other part of the orarion toward the right side under the right armpit toward the front like a belt, and casts it over the shoulders onto the right shoulder; then he takes both ends of the orarion falling in front upon the breast, crosses them crosswise, and tucks them under the orarion girded below the breast, so that the cross is in front and upon the back. There follows the exclamation: "For Thine is the kingdom, etc.", page 336 (38), Goar 64, and immediately after "Amen" there follows "Peace be unto all"; here at "Peace be unto all" the Priest turns toward the people, yet not with his back unto the Holy Gifts, but having stepped slightly aside unto the left side of the Holy Table, he turns with the greater part of his body toward the people and blesses them once crosswise with his hand, and with the very same half-circle turns back unto the Holy Gifts, facing the Holy Table; and when the Deacon saith: "Bow your heads [unto the Lord]...", Goar 64, the Priest, having inclined his head, recites the prayer: "We give thanks unto Thee, O King, etc.", 336 (38), Goar 65, and then having bowed low unto the Holy Gifts, proclaims: "Through the grace and compassions, etc.", page 336 (38), Goar 65; and having stepped slightly unto the right, he turns slightly sideways and washes the first two fingers of both hands, and having wiped them, he turns again unto the Holy Gifts, unto which he bows profoundly (the other concelebrants wash the palms of their right hands); and having raised his hands and eyes slightly aloft, he prays: "Give heed, O Lord Jesus Christ, etc.", page 337 (39), Goar 65; and after the prayer he strikes his breast three times, each time pronouncing: "O God, be merciful unto me a sinner," Goar 65; and having uncovered the holy chalice, he bows profoundly and immediately

## 2. Scholarly Critical Apparatus & Footnotes

[^153]: Pope Benedict XIV (Prospero Lambertini), *De Sacrosancto Sacrificio Missae*, Lib. I, cap. 9, no. 90 (or *Lectio* 90): citing the ancient Eastern liturgical custom whereby Maronites and Ambrosians place the amice (*humerale* / *amictus* / *наплещникъ*) over the alb/sticharion. This directly corresponds to the printed footnote `1) De sacrificio Missae Lect. 90.` at the bottom of Book p. 157 .

[^154]: Pope Benedict XIV's *Euchologion sive Rituale Graecorum* (Rome, 1754): the exclusion of extracting separate particles on the diskos for the Honorable Cross and the Bodiless Powers (Angels). The Synod adduces this Roman edition of the Greek Euchologion and liturgical theology, explaining that particles extracted upon the diskos represent exclusively the threefold states of the Church—the Church Triumphant (the Saints), the Church Suffering (the souls in Purgatory), and the Church Militant (the living faithful)—whereas the Lamb alone represents Jesus Christ, the Head of the Church.

[^155]: The solemn canonization of Saint Josaphat Kuntsevych, OSBM, Archbishop of Polotsk and Hieromartyr of Vitebsk, proclaimed by Pope Pius IX on June 29, 1867, in the Vatican Basilica. By virtue of this universal canonization, the Synod decrees that in the Proskomide commemoration the title "blessed" (*блаженнаго*) is definitively replaced with "holy" (*святаго*), and introduces the commemoration of the Slavic Apostles Saints Cyril and Methodius immediately preceding him.

[^156]: The textual criticism of the Cherubic Hymn (*Херувимская пѣснь* / *Hymnus Cherubicus*). The Synod rejects the textual corruption introduced into the recent Benedictine Roman edition of the Euchologion (*Eὐχολόγιον τὸ μέγα*, Grottaferrata / Rome) which printed *"Яко Царя всѣхъ подъимемъ"* (*Ὡς τὸν βασιλέα τῶν ὅλων ὑποδεξόμενοι* understood as future subjunctive "that we may receive"), affirming instead the authentic traditional Church Slavonic reading *"Яко Царя всѣхъ подъемлюще"* (present participle matching the Greek *ὑποδεξόμενοι* / *doryphoroumenon* as "bearing up / receiving in triumph"), invisibly attended by the angelic ranks.

[^157]: Liturgical textual emendation in the Anaphora of the Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great. The Synod amends the obscure Slavonic rendering *"Путесотворивый воскресеніе"* translating the Greek clause *ὁδοποιήσας πάσῃ σаркὶ τὴν ἐк νεκρῶν ἀνάстаσιν* ("having paved the way for all flesh unto the resurrection from the dead"), clarifying that it must be translated and understood as *"Къ еже изъ мертвыхъ воскресенію"*.

[^158]: The Troparion of the Third Hour (*"O Lord, Who didst send down Thy All-Holy Spirit at the third hour upon Thine Apostles..."*) inserted into the Epiklesis of the Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and St. Basil the Great. Although critical liturgical scholars and certain Roman editions noted that this troparion was an interpolated medieval Slavic and post-Byzantine addition not found in the ancient uncial Greek euchologia (such as the 8th-century Barberini Greek 336), the Fathers of the 1891 Lviv Synod expressly resolved to omit any reformatory marginal note and maintain the unbroken Ruthenian liturgical praxis and received rubrics of the printed Liturgicons.

[^159]: Church Slavonic philological and grammatical emendation in the diptychs following the Megalynarion (*"Especially for our all-holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady Theotokos..."*). The Synod corrects the erroneous genitive singular *"Святаго Іоанна"* in late editions, restoring the precise Slavonic locative case *"О святѣмъ Іоаннѣ"* for the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom (corresponding to Greek *ὑπέρ* with genitive, rendered by Slavonic *o* with locative, Latin *pro*) and the instrumental case *"Съ святымъ Іоанномъ"* for the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great (corresponding to Greek *μετά* with genitive, rendered by Slavonic *съ* with instrumental, Latin *cum*), while mandating the archaic locative adjective ending *-ѣ* rather than *-ой* (*"О Пресвятѣй"*).

---

# Acts and Decrees of the Ruthenian Provincial Synod of Lviv (1891)

## 1. Titulus V: On the Holy Liturgy (Conclusion)

### The Fraction, Clergy Communion, and Distribution unto the Faithful

takes with the first two fingers of both hands the Lamb; and when the Deacon from his place (in the church) proclaims: "Let us attend!" Goar 65, the Priest raises the Lamb slightly aloft over the diskos and not over the chalice, and without tracing a cross with It, proclaims: "Holy Things unto the Holy!" Goar 65 (here the server rings the altar bell); and then he breaks the Lamb along the incisions made across Its center crosswise with the spear, already at the Proskomide, into two parts lengthwise, saying: "Broken and divided is the Lamb of God..." etc., Goar 65, Liturgikon page 337 (39). Then he places the right side of the half upon the right side of the diskos, and the left half he breaks again into two parts crosswise and places Its upper part upon the upper part of the diskos, and the lower half of the same left side upon the left side of the diskos; then he takes the right half of the whole Lamb and breaks It again in the middle crosswise and places the upper part upon the lower side of the diskos, and the lower part upon the right side of the diskos; then he takes the upper part from the upper side of the diskos, raises It with both hands over the chalice, and makes with It the sign of the cross, saying: "The fullness of faith..." etc., page 338 (40), Goar 65, and drops the same gently into the chalice; and having covered the chalice with its veil, taking the same between the 3rd finger and the two joined fingers, he bows profoundly, not opening those two fingers of both hands with which he placed the Lamb into the chalice, and not touching anything with them until the washing of hands, with the exception of the holy Bread in the very rite of Communion, and partially also during the wiping of the chalice, namely when with his thumb he drops the particles into the chalice. After the dropping of the upper part of the Lamb into the chalice, if there be concelebrating priests, then they approach in order according to dignity unto the reception of Communion, and the presiding Priest distributes unto each upon the palm of his right hand a particle, saying: "Christ is among us," and he answers: "He is, and shall be"...—then the Priest spreads his hands, and having inclined his head slightly and gazing upon the Holy Gifts, recites the prayer: "I believe, O Lord, and confess..." etc., page 338 (40); at the words: "Remember me, O Lord..." etc., which he repeats 3 times, he strikes his breast each time,—while the other Priests say the prayer only. Finally, there is a pious custom of those who join unto that prayer yet a second prayer following: "I believe, O Lord, and confess...

that this which I receive..." etc., pages 338 and 339 (40–41), Goar 65, and at the end the Publican's prayer: "O God, be merciful unto me a sinner;—O God, cleanse my sins and have mercy on me;—I have sinned without number, forgive me," and strikes his breast each time. Then the Priest, having bowed profoundly, takes with the first two fingers of his right hand all three particles together, so far as this is possible, placing one particle upon the other in the prescribed order: from the lower part, from the left side, and from the right side of the diskos, and saith: "The precious and most holy..." etc., page 339 (41), Goar page 82, and consumes them with reverence, meditating somewhat upon this Holy Mystery. Having communicated of the Holy Bread, he himself uncovers the chalice (or the Deacon, if there be one), bows profoundly, and sweeps into the chalice attentively and devoutly with the thumb (using also, if it should be necessary, the second finger) of the right hand, holding in his left hand the diskos over the chalice in such wise that not even the smallest particle remains upon the diskos. Then, having bowed profoundly, he takes the chalice in his right hand and the diskos in his left, and placing the same beneath his chin, communicates devoutly, saying: "The precious, most holy..." etc., page 339 (41), Goar 82, drinking from the chalice only once, that is, with a single draught. Then, having set down the chalice on his right side and the diskos on his left side upon the Holy Table, he takes between his third and second finger the lention [purificator], wipes his lips with it with the angelic words spoken unto Isaiah the Prophet: "Lo, this hath touched thy lips..." etc., page 339 (41), Goar 66; then holding with his left hand the base of the chalice, he wipes with the lention that place of the chalice from which he drank, and that only on top and on the outside, and not inside the chalice. Then the other concelebrants also approach and communicate from the chalice in the same manner as the presiding Priest. Then the Priest or the Deacon covers the chalice with its veil, having set aside the lention on the right side, and having bowed profoundly even unto the ground, he takes the chalice with his left hand by its base and with his right by its node [bottom], and turning unto the people proclaims: "With the fear of God [and faith draw near]..." etc., page 340 (42), Goar 67. If there be a Deacon, then the Priest hands him the chalice, turning toward him from the right side; and he, having bowed profoundly, takes the chalice from the Priest in the same manner as the Priest, and from the altar, and not from the Royal Doors, turning with his left side toward the people, proclaims: "With the fear of God...

and faith draw near]..." etc.; then he turns with that very same side toward the Priest and hands him, having bowed, the chalice. Here, if there be laity for Communion, the Priest shall lead for them the prayer: "I believe, O Lord, and confess..." etc., Goar 66, beginning with the sign of the cross: "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen"; and upon the conclusion of the prayer add: "O God, be merciful [unto me a sinner]..." etc., as was said above, and adds: "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit," 1 time, and distributes Communion unto the kneeling laity. Here it is accepted by custom, that before communion the cross also is given to kiss, and that one or two candle-bearers be beside the Priest when he communicates the people kneeling lengthwise in the church and in good order; and he shall communicate them so carefully, lest anything should spill from the spoon; if there be Deacons, then the first of them takes the diskos and goes on the right side ahead, holding the diskos beneath the chin of the communicant, and the second wipes their lips with the lention, saying: "Lo, this hath touched thy lips..." etc., while the Priest distributes Holy Communion with the words: "The precious and most holy and immaculate Body and Blood of our Lord and God..." etc., page as above. If there be no Deacons, then the Priest himself takes in his left hand the chalice, holding the same more or less with the last smaller fingers, and with the two joined fingers and the third, that is, the middle finger, holding the diskos, placing the same beneath the chin of the communicant, and holding with his right hand the lention hanging upon the 4th and 5th fingers, he takes between the two joined fingers and the following third finger the spoon, and communicates the people, saying at each one: "The precious and most holy..." etc., and wiping: "Lo, this hath touched..." etc.
After Communion they enter into the sanctuary, and having set the chalice and diskos with the lention upon the Holy Table and having bowed profoundly, the Priest removes the spoon from the chalice, consumes the remaining particles of the Holy Mysteries with the small spoon if there be need, which he then wipes with his lips and lays upon the lention; and having covered the chalice again with its veil, he turns toward the people (if he doth not communicate laity, then immediately having taken the chalice from the Deacon), and blesses the people crosswise with the chalice covered with the veil with the words: "Save, O God, Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance..." etc., Goar page 67, Liturgikon page 340 (42), and having turned back toward the Altar by that same half-circle, he removes the veil from the chalice, and having bowed profoundly, saith: "Be Thou exalted above the heavens...

### Post-Communion, Ablutions, and Dismissal

O God," Goar 67, Liturgikon page 340 (42); he takes the chalice with both hands, and standing before the Altar, saith secretly: "Blessed is our God," and tracing with it (the chalice) a cross, he turns with his right side toward the people, and not blessing with it, but proclaiming: "Always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages," Goar 67, completes a full circle unto the left side toward the Altar; and having set down the chalice here, he makes a profound bow and consumes [the remaining Gifts] devoutly and attentively, having placed the diskos beneath his chin with his left hand. The spoon after Communion (if it was used) he lays upon the iliton or upon the lention, and during the ablution of hands he places it into the chalice; and after pouring wine and water into it, he returns toward the center of the altar, and having consumed this, wipes it with the lention and sets it aside in its place, etc., as is said in the rubric on page 340 (42): "And the Priest..."
At the words: "With the fear of God..." etc., and further after the words: "Save, O God, Thy people" and "Always, now and forever" at the signal of the bell all the faithful kneel. In accordance with what is here stated, the rubrics in the Sluzhebnik must also be emended.
Here, if there be Deacons, the one who is on the right side pours wine unto the Priest holding the chalice at the first ablution, and wine and water at the second; and then the Deacons, having unbound the orarion, arrange it upon themselves as at the beginning of the Liturgy, and depart unto their places in the church; and having bowed profoundly toward the altar, one of them sings the Ecteny: "Arise, having partaken..." etc., Goar 67, Liturgikon pages 340–341 (42–43).
Here it is noted, that if there be present in the church: the Hierarch, canons [kryloshane], collator (patron), or other distinguished personages, whether ecclesiastical or secular, as for example the chiefs of civil authority, then the Priest, having wiped the diskos, places beneath it a veil, and gives it unto the Deacon, who carries the same unto the said personages to kiss.
Further, the Priest after wiping the chalice and other vessels, folds the same in the very same manner as at the Proskomide, kissing each one separately: having first wiped the chalice and then the diskos, upon the diskos the asterisk, upon the asterisk the small rigid veil, then the aer folded in three and the iliton, and upon this the soft veil, if the Divine Liturgy is celebrated upon some smaller altar (for upon the High...

Altar the iliton shall always remain beneath the Gospel Book) and the spoon, if he takes it unto the sacristy; the chalice thus covered he sets slightly aside, and having folded the iliton, he lays upon it the Holy Gospel Book, which shall always remain upon the High Altar.
Then the Priest reads the prayer: "We give thanks unto Thee, O Master..." etc., Goar 67, Liturgikon page 341 (43), and then proclaims: "For Thou art our sanctification..." etc., Goar 67, Liturgikon 341 (43). Upon the conclusion of this prayer and exclamation, when the Deacon (if there be one; if not, then the Priest himself) proclaims: "Let us go forth in peace," Goar page 68, the Priest descends before the step, and having bowed profoundly before the Altar, goes forth through the Royal Doors into the church; and the Deacons approach the Royal Doors and standing here together, slightly distanced from the Royal Doors, after the Deacon's exclamation: "Let us pray to the Lord," Goar page 68, hold the Sluzhebnik for the Priest, who sings the prayer: "O Lord, Who blessest them that bless Thee..." Goar page 68, Liturgikon page 341 (43). Upon the conclusion of the prayer they enter: the Priest through the Royal Doors, and the Deacons through the deacons' doors unto the Altar; and having recited here the prayer: "The fulfillment of the Law [and the Prophets, Christ our God]..." etc., Goar 68, Liturgikon page 342 (44), all three descend before the step of the altar toward the Royal Doors, and having bowed before the Holy Altar, the Priest stands in the Royal Doors: he blesses the people once with the words: "The blessing of the Lord be upon you, always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages..." etc., Goar page 89, Liturgikon page 342 (44); then the Deacon, facing the people and raising the end of the orarion slightly aloft with his right hand, proclaims: "Wisdom!" Liturgikon page 342 (44). At the words: "Glory be to Thee, O Christ our God, our hope, glory be to Thee..." etc., Goar 68, which the Priest proclaims, they turn toward the Holy Table, making a profound bow, and turn again toward the people, and the Priest sings the Dismissal [Otpust], not blessing, but standing with joined hands.
At a spoken [Read / Low] Divine Liturgy the Priest doth not descend from the Altar, neither here for the dismissal, nor at "The blessing of the Lord," nor for the Small or Great Entrance; but at the Great Entrance at the words: "All you Orthodox Christians..." he turns with the offered Gifts toward the people, completing a full circle, and likewise for the blessing and for the dismissal of the people.

Then follows the polychronion [mnoholitstviye] "Unto many years" as on page 343 (45), to be used according to circumstances and discretion; and that at daily Divine Liturgies secretly only and before the Altar, while at the more solemn and extraordinary ones, the Priest proclaims the polychronion aloud, facing the people: "Unto our most holy Universal Pontiff..." etc. Many years! The choir repeats: "Unto our most faithful Emperor..." etc., "Unto the Most Reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan..." etc., "Unto the God-loving Bishop..." etc.
After that the Priest takes the arranged vessels, descends before the steps of the Altar, reciting the Canticle of St. Simeon: "Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart [in peace]..." Liturgikon page 343 (45); the Deacons, if there be any, or if not, the Priest himself, close the Royal Doors, and having bowed, they depart unto the sacristy. Having arrived thither, the Priest sets the chalice in its place and divests himself of the sacred vestments; in like manner the Deacons and the Priest, having washed their hands, recite the Prayers after Communion devoutly, and lingering for some time in the church, give thanks unto the Lord God for the benefit of the Mystery of the Eucharist, and then departs unto his home [^160].

## 2. Titulus VI: On Churches Dedicated unto the Divine Service

### Preamble and Chapter I: On the Construction of a Church

TITULUS VI.
On Churches Dedicated unto the Divine Service.

"If heaven and the heaven of heavens suffice not God" [^161], how much less can churches erected by men; yet for the sake of men it pleased God that they should render Him honor in some consecrated place; and that in the Old Testament was the Ark, of which God Himself was the architect, wherein also all the holy things of religion were preserved, and all the people gathered at appointed times for the Divine service. But in later ages it pleased God to dwell with men no longer in tents, but in a temple,

which by divine promptings was prepared by David, and finally constructed most magnificently by Solomon; and after its destruction a second was dedicated by Zerubbabel, which, although less magnificent than the first, yet on account of the presence of the Messiah was to become far more illustrious than that one according to the prophecy of Haggai [^162]. But when that one, for the sins of the Jews, was turned unto ashes, new temples were raised everywhere throughout the earth by the new worshippers of God—Christians—in which, from the rising of the sun even unto its going down, a pure offering is offered unto God [^163]; which, although often small, are yet far more magnificent than the first and second Jewish temple, and more awe-inspiring than the place where the wayfaring Patriarch Jacob, standing, beheld in vision heaven opened and a ladder whose ends touched heaven and earth, and the Angels of God ascending upon it, and the Lord Himself established upon its summit [^164]. For our temples derive their sanctity principally from the presence of the Incarnate God, Who abides unceasingly within their tabernacles [kovchehs], ennobled not only by the visitation of Angels, but of the very King of Angels, Whom they, in His descending and ascending unto us, in the Sacrifice and Mystery of the Most Holy Eucharist, themselves accompany inseparably and with reverence. If this be so, then our churches, as abodes of the Living God and havens of the Angels, ought to be so built and adorned as befits so great a Guest: that is, to be erected with all possible magnificence, adorned with external and internal furnishings, provided with sacred vessels and implements, and secured with sufficient revenues for the maintenance thereof.

CHAPTER I.
On the Construction of a Church.

1. Before all things We gladly express Our joy unto our whole people and clergy, that in these recent times, albeit distressing, they have built as many churches

as possible, new, more spacious, and more durable than the old, with the financial assistance of our most pious Emperor Franz Joseph I, whom may God preserve prosperously for the good of His Church unto many years.
Having regard unto the actual construction of our churches in particular, they shall, with respect unto the four cardinal directions, be so oriented as the Typikon of our Rite presupposes and as is requisite for the performance of the rites: namely, so that the people standing and praying in the church of God shall have their faces turned toward the east; that the main doors of the church be turned toward the west, the right side of the church toward the south, and the left toward the north. The reason for this layout is that the people, and with them the priest praying in the church, may be turned toward the east, namely toward Christ Himself, Who in the Holy Scriptures is called the Orient [Dayspring] and Light, because having come into this world, He hath by the light of His truth dispersed the darkness of the night of this age; as also that we, turned toward the east, may recall that we, having been cast out of the earthly paradise planted in the east, ought again to sigh after it. For that we should so act is taught, among others, by St. John of Damascus [^165]: "Since therefore God is spiritual Light, and Christ is the Sun of Righteousness and is called the Orient in Holy Scripture, therefore that direction from which the sun shines forth ought to be consecrated unto Him for worship." Again: "That we, with longing for the ancient paradise, may worship God with our eyes turned toward it." And St. Basil the Great in the Book on the Holy Spirit, Chapter 27, saith: "For this reason we all look toward the east when we pray, yet not many of us know that in doing this we seek our ancient fatherland, that is, paradise, which God planted in Eden toward the east." Likewise: "When the Lord hung upon the Cross, He was turned with His face toward the west, and for that reason we also so worship that we may look upon Him with our eyes." And again: "When the Lord ascended into heaven, He ascended toward the east, and so shall He come as they beheld Him ascending into heaven... therefore, since we await His coming, we worship toward the east. This is an Apostolic tradition not explicitly recorded in the Holy Scriptures."

2. In the construction of a church, moreover, it is necessary to preserve the style and arrangement of parts corresponding unto our Rite, namely: that the church shall be tripartite, comprising the sanctuary [sviatylyshche], separated from the rest of the church by the wall of the Iconostasis, and the nave [khram sam] itself, separated from the narthex [prytvor].
3. As regards the sacristies [diakonikon / vestry], it is better that there be two: one on the right and the other on the left side of the sanctuary, and in that on the left or northern side the table of oblation [prothesis / zhertovnyk] shall be located; yet this sacristy as well as the prothesis must be adjoining the walls of the sanctuary and not of the nave, so that the entrance of the priest prescribed at Vespers and the Liturgy may take place through the northern door from the sanctuary. Unto the building of the church belong also the belfries [dzvonytsi], which likewise shall be built decently, so that by their unsightly appearance they may not clash with the magnificence of the temple.

### Chapter II: On the Interior Adornment of the Church

CHAPTER II.
On the Interior Adornment of the Church.

In the sanctuary, and that in its very center, there shall stand before all things the Holy Table [Altar], so constructed that one can walk around it conveniently; and upon the center of the Altar shall be placed the Tabernacle [Kovcheh], most decently adorned and always maintained with great care and cleanliness both within and without for the reservation of the Most Holy Mysteries. The Tabernacle shall also be lined within with some metal plate. Between 6 larger candlesticks, arranged on both sides of the Tabernacle, there shall rise the Cross, and that with the figure of the Crucified; lower down, four smaller candlesticks, two on each side; in the center of the Altar before the Tabernacle is laid the book of the Holy Gospel, handsomely and beautifully bound, representing Christ the Lord; behind the Altar against the wall there shall be an elevated High Throne, higher up, for the priest to sit during the Epistle and readings. In the nave itself, especially before the icons of the Savior and of the Most Holy Theotokos, let there stand two larger candlesticks placed at such a distance from the Iconostasis that every danger of fire may be guarded against.

Before the Most Holy Mysteries, whether within or outside the Iconostasis, let there hang a burning lamp, either perpetually, or at least during the time of sacred functions. Moreover, from the ceiling of the nave itself there shall hang a chandelier [polyeleos / mnohosvichnyk]; upon the floor in the midst of the nave there shall stand the Tetrapod, upon which the holy icons shall lie for the veneration of the people entering the church, namely on the right the icon of the Cross, and on the left the icon of the Patron Saint or Feast of the church, and that with a standing Cross between four or at least two candlesticks. On both sides of the nave along the walls, near the Iconostasis, there shall be stalls with individual compartments or small Krylosy (choir-stalls / klirosy) for the cantors. In larger churches there shall also be an Ambo [Pulpit] for sermons, and that, if it can conveniently be placed, on the left side, that is, toward the icon of the Most Pure Virgin Mary. Finally, care must be taken that confessionals be provided with grates. In some part closer unto the iconostasis, there shall also be seats or pews for the collators or patrons of the church, and after them also for other distinguished persons. The pious custom is commended, adopted in notable churches, of keeping in the narthex or inner church vestibule a vessel of holy water, with which the faithful, upon entering the church, sign themselves [^166].

### Chapter III: On Sacred Vessels and Church Implements

CHAPTER III.
On Sacred Vessels and Church Implements.

Before all things this Synod admonishes pastors that they endeavor to furnish their church with all sacred vessels, and above all, at least with two chalices; and if one of them should already be so worn that in the interior of the cup the gilding is rubbed off, let them immediately endeavor to have it newly gilded and blessed. In general

all those holy vessels which immediately touch the Most Pure Body and Blood of the Lord must be handed over for consecration unto the Ordinary, or unto one furnished by him with special faculty; therefore, besides the chalice, the diskos or paten, and the pyx [ciborium / pushka], there shall be surrendered for consecration the sacred spoons, the pyx [daronosytsia] for carrying the Most Holy Mysteries, and the monstrance-receptacle for inserting the Lamb, the so-called Melchizedek, serving for the placement of the Most Holy Body in the monstrance; whereas other vessels may be blessed by an ordinary priest. Let them endeavor that sacred vessels be not purchased or repaired among Jews, which is to be understood also concerning all sacred implements. As to sacred vestments and cloths [snariady], let them also endeavor not only that they be in sufficient abundance, but also that they be decent and clean, and let them strictly observe concerning them everything that was already prescribed by the Synod of Zamość [^167].

### Chapter IV: On the Colors of Church Vestments

CHAPTER IV.
On the Colors of Church Vestments.

1. Although in the church Typikons mention is made of only two colors, yet nowadays vestments of any color whatsoever are frequently used, as well as of mixed color; nevertheless this present Synod, desiring also on this point to introduce uniformity, deems it expedient to set forth for Priests the following rule:
2. a) That the bright color, that is, white, and those closest unto it, such as gold, silver, or variegated white (provided however that white predominate), shall be used on Sundays, on Feasts of the Lord, of the Most Blessed Virgin, and of Polyeleos Saints who are not martyrs; excepting however the Feast of the Compassion [Dolors / Sostradaniye] of the Most Pure Virgin Mary, of the Precious Cross, and of the Beheading of St. John the Baptist, on which it is proper to use violet (purple) color.

3. b) Vestments of red color shall be used on the feasts of Holy Martyrs, unless they fall on a Sunday, for then on account of the predominant Sunday service, bright vestments shall be used.
4. c) Vestments of violet color on the Eves of the Nativity and Theophany of the Lord if they fall on fasting days; on the days of the Great Fast (Lent), as also of Holy Week, until the reading of the Gospel at the Liturgy of Holy Saturday, before which the violet vestments shall be laid aside and bright ones assumed, understood except on Sundays (except the 3rd Sunday of the Veneration of the Cross) and Saturdays, on which the bright color shall be used, unless there should occur the daily office for the departed as on the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Saturdays of the Great Fast.
5. d) Vestments of black color shall be used at Offices and Liturgies for the departed, by reason of the prevailing contemporary custom both of the Greeks and of all adherents of this Rite, excepting the days of the whole Bright Week, for then the white color shall be used.
6. e) During daily or ferial services vestments of mixed color shall be used, on account of the combined service of the Octoechos and Menaion, excepting Wednesdays and Fridays, on which on account of the service of the Cross and the fast, violet shall be used.
As to the days of the other fasts besides the Great Fast (Lent), a celebration of a strictly penitential character is no longer in use; therefore those days, as to the use of vestments, are to be regarded as non-fasting.
Such an assignment of colors, although red was formerly proper unto penitential days and for the departed, yet by reason of the prevailing contemporary custom both of the Greeks and of all Catholic Churches of every Rite, the Synod hath judged it expedient to enact for future practice. Since however as regards distinguishing red from violet, vestments of this latter color are nowadays very rarely used, therefore, wherever such are lacking, red may temporarily be used.
7. At the burials of children who before the use of reason have passed from this life unto the Lord, it is

proper to adopt that reasonable custom of certain localities, that during these ceremonies bright vestments should be used, to signify the innocence and the joy of heavenly glory whereof they have become partakers.

## 3. Titulus VII: On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy

### Preamble and Chapter I: On the Roman Pontiff

TITULUS VII.
On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.

The Church of Christ militant journeys through the wilderness of this age unto eternal felicity—unto the Promised Land—not in disarray and blindly, but in order and with majesty, terrible unto her enemies: "terrible as an army set in array" [^168]. This very march of the people of God unto eternal rest and heavenly sabbath observance [^169], the Only-begotten Son of God, having become man, prefigured in Himself and inaugurated from Himself.
And having Himself to depart through the veil of His flesh [^170] into the holy of holies not made with hands, a High Priest forever [^171] to make intercession for us before the Heavenly Father, and the Forerunner of our entrance into heaven, He left in His stead here on earth a teaching society, and that so firmly bound and ordered that it should consist both of a visible head and of other visible members after the likeness of the human body. He left, namely: the Supreme Head of the Church, the Roman Pontiff the Pope, and Bishops, and then Presbyters and Deacons, so that each lower grade should be subject unto the higher.
Yet, since with the course of time the congregation of the faithful spread throughout the whole universe, the Church of Christ, guided by His Spirit, for the better administration of the sacred office, besides those grades which the Lord Himself appointed, instituted also other grades, both higher and lower: and the higher in such wise that among Bishops certain ones in the provinces should take precedence over others both in honor and in jurisdiction, which are, first: Patriarchs, then Metropolitans, and finally Archbishops. Because, as saith

St. Leo the Great, even among the most blessed Apostles, alongside similarity of honor, there was a certain distinction in power; and though the election of all was equal, yet unto one was it given to preside over the rest. From that pattern arose also the distinction among Bishops, and by a sublime ordinance it was established that not all should claim all things for themselves, but that in individual provinces there should be individuals who should have the first voice among the brethren [^172]. As lower grades there are also appointed Subdeacons, Cantors, and Readers in our Church.

CHAPTER I.
On the Roman Pontiff.

Although the Lord conferred upon all the Apostles authority to govern the visible Kingdom of God, yet for the preservation of unity He bestowed immediate, ordinary, supreme power upon Peter alone. For when the Savior, sending the Apostles into the whole world, furnished them with that same power which He Himself had received from His Father: "All power is given unto Me in heaven and in earth" [^173]... and promised them that He would be with them even unto the end of the ages [^174]: "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world"; yet, since on account of death it was not permitted unto the Apostles to abide even unto the consummation of the age, it follows that Christ even unto the end of the ages remains equally with their successors, whom also He bound all the faithful to obey: "He that hears you hears Me" [^175].
In the place therefore of Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, his lawful successors hold the supreme power of ecclesiastical governance according to divine law. But since Peter, by reason of holding the Episcopate in Rome, died there, and after him the Roman Pontiffs the Popes succeeded there: therefore by that very fact, none other than they are accounted the successors of Peter in the Church of God. It is necessary therefore that every soul belonging unto the flock of the Lord should be subject unto that supreme authority, and that as well in what pertains unto faith

and morals, as in everything else that pertains unto the external governance of the Church; and although in the Catholic Church there flourishes a diversity as well of rites as of discipline, yet this occurs not otherwise than under that supreme governor. Complete autonomy therefore of Churches that differ whether in rite, or language, or nationality, must be utterly excluded from this form of ecclesiastical governance. Therefore this Synod deems it its duty to insist that that which it hath set forth in Titulus I concerning the supreme authority and rights of the Roman Pontiff, all should have before their eyes and diligently observe, even as concerning the very same both ecclesiastical testimonies, especially from our liturgical books relating unto this matter, and collected by the late His Eminence Cardinal Mykhailo Levytsky, Metropolitan of Halych, in his Pastoral Letter of March 10, 1841, clearly instruct us [^176].

### Chapter II: On the Metropolitan

CHAPTER II.
On the Metropolitan.

1. According to the ancient custom of the Church, sacred Prelates more distinguished among others had their seats in the more distinguished cities, so that already in Apostolic times in the center of the universal empire Peter himself and his successors established their see; after him in Alexandria, the second city after Rome, the Patriarch of Alexandria; in Antioch, the third city—the Patriarch of Antioch; in Jerusalem, the fourth city after Rome—the Patriarch of Jerusalem. When however Constantine the Great transferred the seat of his political rule from the city of Rome unto Constantinople, there began by reason of the preeminence of the political center to grow also the Church of Constantinople, and thence the Bishop of Constantinople strove to arrogate unto himself the title of Patriarch. But although at first on account of the authority of the Prelate of Old Rome that title was not generally recognized, yet in the course of time, and especially

with the consent of the Roman Pontiff, the patriarchal dignity and title of Patriarch was recognized for the Bishops of Constantinople, yet under this condition, that they should preserve communion with the See of Peter, and recognize the primacy of the Roman Pontiffs.
Nor was this patriarchate alone, but the other three above-mentioned were established not otherwise than by the authority of the Supreme Pontiff, that is, with his consent and approval, according to the testimony of Benedict XI, who thus teaches concerning this: "The Holy Roman Church, which according to the ordinance of the Lord holds over all others the primacy of ordinary power from God, as the mother and teacher of all Christ's faithful, instituted four patriarchal sees, among which she willed that after the Roman Church herself, Constantinople should hold the first, Alexandria the second, Antioch the third, and Jerusalem the fourth place, and adorned them with many prerogatives, honors, and privileges" [^177].
2. That rule, of establishing the more distinguished sacred Prelates in cities more notable from a political point of view, was observed also in our Ruthenian lands; so that in the chief city of all Rus', immediately from the conversion of the Ruthenians unto the Christian faith in the 10th century and afterwards, while communion with the Holy Apostolic Roman See still continued, the chief Bishop of all Rus' was established in Kyiv, under the title of Metropolitan of All Rus'. Although, on account of political changes and the machinations of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, that see lost its original title and its rights, yet the Ruthenian Church, united with the center of ecclesiastical unity, the Roman Pope, recovered again the Metropolitan dignity by the providence of God and the gracious favor of the Roman Pontiffs themselves, with an altered place of residence and thereby also with the title of Kyiv changed unto Halych. For when the realms of the Ruthenian rulers were divided through the invasions of the Tatars and the separation of Kyiv from the Principality of Halych was consummated, by reason of the Halychian

princes their chief city of political rule—Halych—was elevated unto the dignity of a Metropolis, and this the Apostolic See confirmed again together with the Holy Union, and restored unto it all former rights which the Metropolitan of Kyiv possessed. For in the Bull of Pope Pius VII, *In universalis [Ecclesiae regimine]*, of February 22 [^178], 1807, we read thus: "We grant unto the same Francis, Emperor and King, and unto His successors in the Kingdom of Galicia, by special favor of grace, the power, in every case of vacancy, to nominate unto the above-mentioned jointly united Archiepiscopal Churches of Lviv and Halych, and unto the Episcopal Churches of Kholm and Peremyshl within the time defined by law, ecclesiastical persons, capable, and furnished with such qualities as are required according to the prescriptions of the sacred Canons and according to the decrees... of the Synod of Zamość; with this disposition, however, that every one nominated for the Metropolitan Church shall be bound to request and obtain from Us and from the Roman Pontiff for the time being the confirmation of his nomination, installation, and possession of the same Church, as also permission for the rite of consecration, and to procure the Apostolic letters in the customary form through the secret channel indicated by the Curia... Unto the same... Metropolitan, having regard unto special circumstances and out of special favor, We concede the faculty to confirm and institute, and unto the same to confer consecration, by the authority and in the name of the Apostolic See, those nominated unto his suffragan Episcopal Churches of Kholm and Peremyshl, provided only they be furnished with those qualities which, as aforesaid, are required, in the manner and form in which that power was granted unto the Metropolitan of Kyiv by the above-named Pope Clement VIII, by the same's Apostolic Brief: *Decet Romanum Pontificem*" [^179].
3. Furthermore, although the ancient metropolitan rights, cited above, granted by Pope Clement VIII and confirmed by Pius VII, yet nevertheless, because the contemporary governance of Churches, including our own, hath been almost accommodated unto the prescription

of the Council of Trent, therefore also the rights of the Metropolitan of Halych are more or less the very same which according to common law belong unto all Metropolitans, excepting this one thing: that unto this day the Metropolitan of Halych hath the power, in the name of the Apostolic See, to confirm, institute, and confer the rite of consecration upon the Bishop of Peremyshl [^180], and according to the most recent concession of the Holy Apostolic See, also as regards the Bishop of Stanyslaviv.
4. Of honorary privileges, moreover, besides those which according to common law belong unto Metropolitans, the Metropolitan of Halych retains specifically this: that before him is borne a cross with two transverse bars; further he hath the use of the Pallium and Sakkos, and the right of commemoration of his name during divine services in all the churches of the province, as also to wear a double-barred cross upon the top of the mitre, pastoral staff, and dikirion.
5. For the rest, leaving in inviolability the decrees of the Synod of Zamość concerning the duties of Metropolitans, a change must here be made regarding the administration of Dioceses when the see becomes vacant in those Chapters which have obtained their confirmation and approval of their statutes from the Holy See, regarding two Vicars whom for this purpose the Chapters immediately upon the death of a Bishop are bound to elect: one for the spiritual governance of the Eparchy, and the other for the administration of temporals, that is, the episcopal mensa estates. Confirmation of those Vicars, however, must be requested of the Metropolitan.

### Chapter III: On Bishops

CHAPTER III.
On Bishops.

1. As the Roman Pontiff is set upon the highest watchtower, whence he may watch over the vineyard of the Lord of hosts spread throughout the whole universe, so the Bishop is set by the Holy Spirit as overseer of his particular vineyard, which, by command of the Lord, hath been committed unto

his watch. As an overseer therefore he ought day and night to keep watch, lest any stranger should damage the vineyard; nay more, he ought to restrain every enemy of the vineyard from afar by his vigilance, so that in due season he may yield the fruits of the vineyard unto the Lord of the vineyard. Moreover the Bishop is pastor of that portion of the Lord's flock which hath been committed unto his special care by the Lord. As such therefore let him, after the example of Christ the Lord Himself, not refuse even to lay down his life for his sheep, if need should be; watching day and night, as was already said above, let him protect them from wolves, let him lead them unto the most wholesome pasture, and turn them away from what is harmful. He himself is bound "to take up the weak, to heal the sick, to bind up the broken, to bring back the strayed, to seek the lost, and with authority to correct them without harshness" [^181]. The Bishop is furthermore the Angel of his Church, as he is called in the Book of Revelation. As such he ought therefore to keep most diligent watch in the name of God over his Church, and from the wiles of Satan and his angels protect her with the most vigilant circumspection, and that not carelessly or languidly, lest he should perchance fall under those very threats which the Lord announced unto such angels through His servant, the prophet of the New Testament, St. John the Evangelist [^182].
2. As to the rights and duties of Bishops, those rights the Synod of Zamość enumerated quite extensively in Titulus VI, *On Bishops*, which therefore ought to be preserved, except for those changes which, in view of the circumstances of the times, this present Synod deems expedient to make therein; namely: 1) as to the qualities of those who are to bear the episcopal burden.
Although according to the law of the Greeks this right belongs only unto persons chosen from among the monastics, yet on account of the changed circumstances of both the monastic and secular clergy, the Synod declares, on the basis of the dispensation—at least tacit—from that law granted as well unto Metropolitan Spyrydon Lytvynovych as unto his successors by the late Pius

Pope Pius IX even unto this present day, that from now on there may be elevated unto the Episcopate also candidates chosen from among the secular clergy, being in the celibate state, without requesting any further dispensation. 2) As to the canonical visitation of the diocese: That which the Synod of Zamość commands, that it should take place every year, or on account of the extent of the diocese at least every two years, either by the Bishop himself or by visitors to be specially designated by him, this Synod deems proper to modify in such wise that, on account of the excessively great extent of our dioceses, the canonical visitation shall take place every five years, either through the Bishop or through others. This the Synod permits all the more, since it is considered that Bishops already through the deans [proto-presbyters], as it were through their deputies, visit the entire diocese, namely through decanal visitations which take place at least once a year in every parish. The reports moreover of such decanal visitations through the deans let them order to be sent unto themselves immediately, and let them endeavor without delay to prevent any abuses, if any should have occurred.
3. As to the estate of a deceased Bishop, instead of that disposition which the Synod of Zamość prescribes, the prescription of modern law ought to be adopted, as was set forth in the preceding chapter on the Metropolitan, and the same is expressly defined in the statutes of the Chapters [^183].
Finally, the Synod deems it well to charge the Bishops that, since the present age hath produced a worse generation and corruption of morals and subversive principles are creeping in, they endeavor to train the younger clergy already from their youth in piety and the study of the arts, so that the education of seminarians devoting themselves already unto theological studies may not become too difficult, and that for this purpose, with the greatest possible effort, they establish so-called minor seminaries for boys, and furnish those already established with good governance.

## 4. Scholarly Critical Apparatus & Footnotes

[^160]: Synodical liturgical appendix reference: *On the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, see Appendix 33; likewise the Slavonic text of the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and St. Basil the Great among the Ruthenian appendices 33a and 33b* (*О Литургіи Преждеосвященыхъ зри въ додатку 33, такожь текстъ славяньскій Литургіи св. Іоанна Златоуст. и св. Василія Вел. мѣжь додатками рускими 33, а. и 33, б.*). This directly corresponds to printed footnote `1)` at the bottom of Book p. 182 , concluding Titulus V (*On the Holy Liturgy*).

[^161]: II Paralipomenon (II Chronicles) 6:18 (Septuagint versification: *ІІ. Параліп. VI. 18*): "If heaven and the heaven of heavens suffice not God, how much less this house which I have built!" Cited at the opening of Titulus VI, *On Churches Dedicated unto the Divine Service* (*О храмахъ посвященыхъ Службѣ Божôй*), Book p. 182 .

[^162]: Prophecy of Haggai (Aggeus) 2:9–10 (LXX: Haggai 2:10; printed as *Гл. II., 10*): "Great shall be the glory of this last house more than of the first, saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace..." Book p. 183 .

[^163]: Malachi 1:11 (*Малах. I., 11*): "For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down, My name hath been glorified among the Gentiles; and in every place incense is offered unto My name, and a pure offering." Book p. 183 .

[^164]: Genesis 28:12–13 (*Быт. 28. 12. 13*): Jacob's vision of the heavenly ladder and the Lord standing above it at Bethel: "How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven." Book p. 183 .

[^165]: St. John of Damascus, *De Fide Orthodoxa* (*An Exact Exposition of the Orthodox Faith*), Book IV, Chapter 12 (*Concerning Worship toward the East* / *О вѣрѣ правосл. книг. 4. гл. 12* / PG 94, 1157–1162): demonstrating the Apostolic antiquity and theological symbolism of praying toward the east, facing Christ the spiritual Sun of Righteousness and the ancient Paradise planted in the east. Book p. 184 .

[^166]: Synod of Zamość (1720), Titulus *On Churches* (*De ecclesiis*), and in the Inquiries for Canonical Visitations; likewise the decrees and canons of the Greek-Melkite (Maronite) Synod of Mount Lebanon (1736), Part IV, Chapter I, in *Collectio Lacensis* (*Acta et Decreta Sacrorum Conciliorum Recentiorum*, Friburgi Brisgoviae, Tom. II): prescribing the retention of the holy water vessel at church entrances for the faithful to sign themselves upon entry. Book p. 186 .

[^167]: Synod of Zamość (1720), Titulus III, *On the Sacraments and Their Administration*, § 4, *On the Celebration of the Liturgy and Inquiries concerning the Most Holy Eucharist* (*Тит: III. О Тайнахъ и ихъ строеню § 4. О служеню Литургіи и вопр. о Найсвятѣйшой Євхаристіи*): regulating the consecration, gilding, maintenance, and reverence due unto sacred vessels and liturgical linen. Book p. 187 .

[^168]: Song of Songs (Canticle of Canticles) 6:4, 10 (LXX: Canticle 6:3, 9; printed as *Пѣснь пѣсней 6. 3. 9.*): "Who is she that comes forth as the morning rising, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, terrible as an army set in array?" (*ужасъ яко вчиненны* / *terribilis ut castrorum acies ordinata*). Opening of Titulus VII, *On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy* (*О Іерархіи церковнôй*), Book p. 189 .

[^169]: Hebrews 4:9 (*Євр. 4. 9.*): "There remains therefore a sabbath rest for the people of God." Book p. 189 .

[^170]: Hebrews 10:20 (*Євр. 10. 20.*): "By a new and living way, which He hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, His flesh." Book p. 189 .

[^171]: Hebrews 7:25 (and Hebrews 6:20 / 7:24; printed as *Євр. 7. 25.*): Christ the High Priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek, ever living to make intercession for us before the Father. Book p. 189 .

[^172]: St. Leo the Great (Pope Leo I), *Epistola 84* (to Anastasius, Bishop of Thessalonica), Chapter 11 (PL 54, 920): *"De qua forma episcoporum quoque est orta distinctio, et magna ordinatione provisum est, ne omnes sibi omnia vindicarent, sed essent in singulis provinciis singuli, quorum inter fratres haberetur prima sententia..."* Book p. 190 .

[^173]: Matthew 28:18 (*Мат. 28. 18.*): "All power is given unto Me in heaven and in earth." Book p. 190 .

[^174]: Matthew 28:20 (*Мат. 28, 20.*): "Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Amen." Book p. 190 .

[^175]: Luke 10:16 (*Лук. 10. 16.*): "He that heareth you heareth Me; and he that despiseth you despiseth Me; and he that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me." Book p. 190 .

[^176]: Appendix III, 1. b: The historic Pastoral Letter of Cardinal Mykhailo Levytsky, Metropolitan of Halych, Archbishop of Lviv, dated March 10, 1841 (*Пастырское посланіє бл. п. Его Еминенціи кардинала Михаила Левицкого, Митрополита Галицкого, зъ дня 10. марта 1841*), compiling patristic and liturgical testimonies from the Ruthenian Sluzhebniks and Trebniks regarding the universal primacy of the Roman See. Book p. 191 .

[^177]: Fourth Lateran Council (1215) under Pope Innocent III, Constitution V (*De dignitate patriarcharum* / *Antiqua concilia* / *Antiqua patriarchalium sedium privilegia renovantes*), incorporated into the *Decretals of Gregory IX* (Corpus Juris Canonici, Lib. I, tit. 33, cap. 23) and cited by Pope Benedict XI: affirming the traditional order of the four patriarchal sees after Rome (Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem) derived from and dependent upon the Roman primacy. Book p. 192 .

[^178]: Anthony Petrushevych (*Антоній Петрушевичъ*), Galician-Ruthenian historian and canon: his critical historical monograph (*Историческое изслѣдованіе*) dates the signing or promulgation of Pope Pius VII's Bull *In universalis Ecclesiae regimine* as April 15, 1807, rather than February 22. Book p. 193 .

[^179]: Papal Apostolic Brief / Constitution of Pope Clement VIII, *Decet Romanum Pontificem*, dated 7 Kalends of March 1595/1596 (February 23, 1596, more romano 1595): ratifying the Union of Brest and confirming unto the Ruthenian Metropolitan of Kyiv the traditional patriarchal right to confirm, institute, and consecrate the suffragan bishops of his province. Book p. 193 .

[^180]: Papal Bull of Pope Pius VII, *In universalis Ecclesiae regimine*, dated February 22, 1807: canonically restoring the ancient Ruthenian Metropolitan See of Halych and uniting it in perpetuity with the Archeparchy of Lviv, confirming the Metropolitan's jurisdiction over the Eparchies of Peremyshl and Kholm. Book p. 194 .

[^181]: Ezekiel 34:4 (*Іезек. 34. 4.*): The pastoral mandate and divine judgment against neglectful shepherds: "The weak have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them." Book p. 195 .

[^182]: Apocalypse (Book of Revelation) chapters 2 and 3: the divine epistles and solemn warnings sent by Christ through St. John unto the Angels (Bishops) of the seven Churches of Asia. The printed text reads `Апок. III и IV.` (*Апок. II и III* intended, as chapters 2–3 contain the seven messages unto the Angels of the Churches). Book p. 195 .

[^183]: Decrees of the 1891 Lviv Provincial Synod, Titulus VII, Chapter IV, *On Cathedral and Collegiate Chapters* (*Глава IV. О Капитулахъ*), infra: regulating the election and powers of the two Vicars (Capitular / Administrator and Temporalities) upon the vacancy of the episcopal see. Book p. 196 .

---

# Acts and Decrees of the Ruthenian Provincial Synod of Lviv (1891)

### Titulus VII (Continued): On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy

### Chapter IV: On Cathedral Chapters

CHAPTER IV.
On Cathedral Chapters.

1. The principal sacred council wherewith each Diocesan Bishop is crowned, even as the Lord Himself by the council of the Apostles, is without doubt the Cathedral Chapter, composed among us customarily of Canons (*Kryloshany*), which, as on the one hand it devotes itself unto the public praise of God, so on the other hand it offers its assistance unto the Bishop in the governance of very extensive dioceses, which otherwise it would be almost impossible for Bishops alone to administer. That unto such a station therefore it behoves to elect only men distinguished above others in piety and learning is evident, so that by such means the episcopal crown may shine as if with the most precious stones.
2. As to the original establishment of this manner of Chapters in our Church, it ought to be known that, inasmuch as they constituted the presbytery of the Bishop, they existed in the Ruthenian Church already from ancient times under the name of *krylos* (*kliros*), whence the Ruthenian name *kryloshanyn* [canon] also takes its origin. And inasmuch as unto those same Chapters there was added the rank and title of Canons, as also of consistorial referendaries, according to the rule of the Chapters of the Latin Rite situated in these northern regions of ours, their first detailed organization—namely that of the Chapter of Lviv—was accomplished by Bishop Joseph Shumlansky in the year 1700, and as to the Chapter of Peremyshl, by Innocent Vynnytsky in the year 1687. Those two Chapters, having fallen little by little into decay, were organized anew, and that the first on March 11, 1771, by Bishop Leo Sheptytsky, which new organization was confirmed by the Austrian Government by virtue of a court decree dated July 15, 1774, under Empress Maria Theresa, as to its form, yet not in such wise that that confirmation obtained execution. For this was finally accomplished in the year 1813 on February 25 by an Imperial Diploma of His Majesty the Emperor of blessed memory Franz I; while the second, or that of Peremyshl, under that same Emperor, by an imperial diploma of April 20, 1816, upon the intercession of Mykhailo Levytsky,

the then Bishop of Peremyshl. The Chapter of Stanyslaviv was founded in that very same year wherein the Bishopric was established, that is, 1885, by the authority granted unto the very first Bishop, the Reverend Father Julian Pelesz, in the Bull of Foundation.
3. All those Chapters received in our times their confirmation from the Holy See, and that: the Chapter of Lviv and that of Peremyshl through a Brief issued by our Holy Father Pius IX in Rome at Saint Peter's under the Fisherman's Ring on July 12, 1864.—Afterwards the Chapter of Lviv received also the confirmation of its statutes from that same Holy Apostolic See, by a decree issued by the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith for Affairs of the Eastern Rites on September 4, 1875, in this form: "Whereas the Most Reverend Father Joseph Sembratovych, Archbishop of Lviv of the Greek-Ruthenian Rite, according to the prescription of the Apostolic Letter of July 12, 1864, whereby our Holy Father Pius IX established Chapters at the Metropolitan Church of Lviv and the Cathedral Church of Peremyshl, submitted the statutes of the said Metropolitan Chapter, in order that they might be subjected unto the examination and approval of the Sacred Congregation, Their Eminences the Fathers of that Sacred Council for the Propagation of the Christian Name for Affairs of Churches of the Eastern Rite, in a general congregation held on August 21 of the year 1875 just past, having examined everything thoroughly, resolved that they, according to the form in which they are contained in the attached copy, ought to be confirmed. This resolution of Their Eminences the Fathers, His Holiness, upon the proposal of the Secretary undersigned, in an audience of the 31st day of the same month and year, graciously approved and deigned to declare valid. Given at Rome in the palace of the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith for Affairs of the Eastern Rite on the 4th day of September 1875. Alessandro Card. Franchi, Prefect.—Gaetano Aloisi Masella, Secretary" [^184].—The Chapter of Peremyshl however, for the reason that up unto this time it hath not submitted its statutes unto the Holy See for confirmation, doth not enjoy up unto the present the consequences of its confirmation, since its establishment took place with that express reservation, if—within

six months the capitular statutes should be submitted unto the Holy See for confirmation.
Lest therefore that Chapter should be deprived of its rights, the Synod ordains that the said Chapter, within the space of one year from the celebration of the Synod, shall transmit its statutes unto the Holy See for confirmation [^185]. The Chapter of Stanyslaviv indeed obtained its confirmation and that of its statutes from the Holy See by the authority granted for that purpose unto the Bishop of Stanyslaviv himself by the very Bull of Foundation; nevertheless this Chapter also the Synod admonishes, that it endeavor as quickly as possible to submit its statutes for confirmation [^186].
4. As to the rights, duties, and privileges of the Chapters, those are accurately defined in the capitular statutes, which are also appended here at the end of the Synod [^187]. In addition, the Synod calls upon individual members of the Chapter in the Lord, that even as they excel the whole Clergy in dignity and honors, so likewise they should surpass the rest of the Clergy by examples of virtue, according to the words of the Lord: "For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required" [^188].
5. Most especially doth the said Synod recommend unto them subordination unto their own Bishop as unto their Hierarch, that between the Bishop and the members of the Chapter there may exist that harmony which exists between the various strings of the same instrument, as in his Epistle to the Ephesians the holy Hieromartyr Ignatius admonishes, saying: "Whomsoever the Father of the family sends to govern His family, him ought we so to receive as the very One Who sends him. It is plain therefore that we ought to look upon the Bishop even as upon the Lord Himself"; so that in this manner there may be conferred also upon the Canons of our Chapters that praise which that same God-bearing Martyr once conferred upon the Presbytery of the Church of Ephesus, saying: "For your Presbytery, worthy of praise and worthy of God, is fitted unto the Bishop as strings are to a cithara. Therefore in your accord

and harmonious love Jesus Christ is sung." And that this may be attained, let the Canons (*Kryloshany*) conscientiously assist their Bishop with their counsels and deeds, accurately observe his commands, and show themselves ever ready to undertake all affairs and bring them unto a conclusion.

### Chapter V: On Vicars Forane or Deans

CHAPTER V.
On Vicars Forane or Deans.

1. Although the governance of the Church of God belongs properly unto Bishops, whom the Holy Spirit Himself hath placed for that purpose, yet, because on account of the extent of ecclesiastical territories the Bishop is not able himself immediately to fulfill this heavenly office of his, it is therefore necessary for him to associate unto himself for a share in these labors some of the more excellent of his clergy, who, because they represent the Hierarch himself of their diocese in administration, ought also themselves to represent his qualities and virtues; and having become superiors of the whole clergy of their deanery, they ought to become an example of all ecclesiastical prescriptions, unto the observance of which they have been chosen to direct the clergy. Bearing this in mind, that even as they have become together with the Bishop partakers of the labors to be borne in the vineyard of the Lord,—so likewise it shall come to pass, that one day before others they shall become partakers of the fruits of their labors, according to the words of the Apostle: "The laborer is worthy of his reward" [^189].
The duties of Deans are the following:
1. Vigilance over the doctrine of faith, morals, and holy discipline, especially as to the celebration of divine services, the administration of the Holy Mysteries, the visitation of the sick, the preaching of the Word of God, the visitation of schools and the teaching of Christian doctrine therein, understood first of all as regards the clergy, and then as regards the people of their deanery; so that, if they should perceive that anything opposes the rule of the holy canons and the ordinances of the Bishop, let them immediately endeavor

themselves of their own accord to remedy it; and if this should appear difficult unto them, let them report the whole matter without delay unto their Ordinary.
2. Supervision over the administration of the temporalities and foundations of individual churches of the deanery, taking care that nothing of them be lost, or deteriorated, or altered; and for this purpose it shall be a grave duty of Deans to examine the annual accounts of those temporalities and foundations.
3. Induction into canonical possession of pastors, and the handing over unto them in the name and representation of the Ordinaries of the churches, temporalities, legacies, foundations, all acts and books, as also all possessions of the churches, unto the administration whereof they are admitted.
4. Reporting unto the Bishop concerning the more important affairs, and inversely informing the clergy concerning the commands of the Bishop, and transmitting letters concerning current affairs which are mutually to be communicated, appending also their own opinion concerning the matter in question.
5. Holding every year decanal conferences [synodules] with the clergy of their deanery, according to the rule prescribed by the Diocesan Ordinary, and reporting concerning the matters discussed therein unto the Bishop as quickly as possible after the celebration of each conference.
6. Inspection of all the parishes of their deanery every year, and an accurate report concerning their condition.
7. Provision concerning a pastor departing unto God: namely, that he administer unto him the Holy Mysteries and other spiritual aids, or take care that they be administered by someone else; that after his death he bury him with the rites proper unto priests, together with the fellow priests of the deanery; and then take over all parish documents, appoint a temporary administrator, and not fail to inform the Ordinary concerning all these things.
8. Permission for pastors to absent themselves from their parishes for up to eight days for any grave cause.
2. As to the honorary rights of Deans, they are the following:

The Dean receives from the Religious Fund for the fulfillment of his office and for chancery expenses at least 100 gulden annually. He hath the privilege of wearing a reverenda with a so-called pelerine and with double sleeves and a black sash with golden fringe. Upon his arrival for an official decanal inspection, the local pastor and the brotherhood of that church shall receive him at the parish church with the ringing of bells.—Deans are honored with the title: "Very Reverend Father." Because they exercise office in the name of their Bishop, honor, reverence, and obedience are due unto them from the clergy corresponding unto their office, and precedence both in church and outside, when they are engaged in their administration.

### Chapter VI: On Pastors

CHAPTER VI.
On Pastors.

1. Bishops associate Pastors unto themselves for a share in solicitude for the salvation of souls of the dioceses committed unto them; nevertheless they shall govern the parish committed unto them in dependence upon the Bishop. And because they are immediately joined unto their people, and therefore can work more effectively for their salvation—they ought to know what a burden is laid upon them, and what an account they must render unto God. With that distinguished office and dignity of theirs, therefore, there ought to be joined also corresponding virtues of the spirit, which they shall display unto their people not by word only, but also by example, so that that which they teach the people by word, they shall first fulfill in deed, according unto that which holy Evangelist Luke writes concerning the Lord: "Jesus began both to do and teach" [^190].
2. Further, the office of pastor is comprised in three heads: namely, that he be a teacher, a minister, and a shepherd.
As a teacher he ought to apply himself unto the preaching of the Word of God and the teaching of Christian doctrine (catechesis

so that by these he may instruct his flock in the way of eternal salvation. As a preacher and teacher of Christian doctrine, let him observe accurately the prescriptions of the holy Canons: namely, that on every Sunday and feast day he always deliver a sermon during the Liturgy, and after Vespers impart Christian instruction; and also upon other convenient occasions let him endeavor to fulfill that duty, and also privately, in season and out of season, let him endeavor to introduce good customs among the faithful [^191].
As a minister, acting in the person of Christ, he is bound first of all to offer and apply for his sheep the sacrifice of the Divine Liturgy on Sundays and prescribed feast days; and besides that, according to the custom and prescription existing among us from ancient times, on every Sunday and prescribed feast day to chant Matins and the First Hour, and in the afternoon, Vespers, besides other extraordinary sacred functions according to the prescriptions of the Typikon and according to the needs of the faithful, whether celebrated within the church or outside the church.
3. As dispensers of the Mysteries of God, pastors are bound to administer the Holy Mysteries unto the faithful whenever they request them, or whenever they themselves perceive the need thereof, and that with that gravity, faith, and devotion which befits things so holy; and with such external pronunciation of the words and accompaniment of ritual actions that the faithful may receive the fruits of the Holy Mysteries proceeding not only from the work worked (*ex opere operato*), but also from the work of the worker (*ex opere operantis*), and that they may be thoroughly imbued with the mysteries of heavenly things.—Especially as to the Mystery of Penance and the Most Holy Eucharist, they shall show themselves solicitous and willing to administer them unto the same faithful as frequently as possible, sparing no labors, nor diligence, nor patience in the holy Tribunal of Penance, especially in the Paschal season, wherein, according to canon law, the pastor is bound to administer the Holy Eucharist unto his people.—This solicitude of his he is bound also to manifest toward the severely sick in their homes, lest by chance in the final combat

the most terrible of all, they should be left without the aid and strengthening of these Mysteries.
4. As a shepherd or governor of the flock, he is bound comprehensively to watch over the discipline of morals of his flock; and therefore, if he should learn of anything contrary unto morality, he ought to hasten immediately to remedy it,—taking care especially that there be no illicit or suspect cohabitations, that drunkenness and dancing in taverns do not spread, lest on account of their negligence in rooting out those errors they should draw down upon themselves the punishments threatened against the Angel of Pergamum [^192]; that thefts and quarrels and other contentions do not increase, and if they should at any time occur, let him endeavor peacefully and with all patience to settle them, avoiding disputes, and let him strive with gravity corresponding unto his office to bring them to an end. In more difficult cases, however, which he cannot settle himself, he ought to refer the matter unto his Ordinary.
5. For the rest, pastors ought to have solicitude concerning everything that leads unto the salvation of the people, becoming all things unto all men: teachers of youth, fathers of the poor, counselors of the unfortunate and the sick, protectors of orphans and widows, defenders of the oppressed, promoters of pious sodalities, and guardians of religious customs.
6. And that they may be able to satisfy all these duties of theirs, pastors ought almost always to reside in their parishes; and if for any grave reason they should be compelled to absent themselves, they ought not to do so without the permission of their dean, having presented unto him the motive and purpose of their journey, so that the dean may temporarily commit that parish unto one of the neighboring pastors; which permission however the dean can grant only for eight days, and if the reason for absence should require a longer duration of time, in that case he ought through his dean to have recourse unto his Ordinary.
7. In addition, the pastor ought to have in his house a cupboard secured with an appropriate lock, wherein care-

fully all parish acts shall be preserved: first of all the four registers whereof the Synod of Zamość makes mention [^193], and besides these all commands and ordinances of authority, both ecclesiastical and civil, relating unto ecclesiastical affairs.
8. Since therefore such and so great are the duties of a pastor, he unquestionably hath need, for the proper fulfillment thereof, of special help and higher strength, which the pastor therefore shall strive to obtain through unwearied prayers, vigils, and fasts, employing prayer most of all for his sermons, remembering that he could not catch a single soul in the mystical net of Christ, *except at the word of the Lord* [^194]. In particular he shall receive that help from on high by celebrating worthily and devoutly the Divine Sacrifice, if not daily, then at least as frequently as possible, reciting daily and devoutly the Canonical Hours, confessing frequently, accustoming himself daily unto meditations upon heavenly things and spiritual reading, especially of Holy Scripture, which St. Ambrose calls "the priestly book," and St. Athanasius "a paradise wherein all trees are found..." Avoiding worldly public gatherings, as also avoiding noisy dances in his house, even in times of festivities.
9. According to their ability pastors ought also to establish brotherhoods, especially of temperance, admitting however unto the pledge those who have been tested beforehand, and watching over circles designated for literary reading (reading rooms) in the parish, lest books and periodicals hostile unto piety and the Catholic Church or unto good morals should perchance be accepted there; and they themselves ought to hold in their hands, as it were, the key of such societies, so that they may become an instrument of the Church for the promotion of the good of religion and society.

### Chapter VII: On Assistant Priests

CHAPTER VII.
On Assistant Priests.

1. Over the mystical fishing of the night of this age, by the word of the Lord, one Peter is placed, unto him are added the Apostles as helpers, and unto these other fellow-workers. After the death of Peter and the Apostles and the disciples of Christ, according to that same will of Christ and by His ordinance, their lawful successors continue that mystical fishing: namely, the prince of all and governor of the ship of the Church, the Roman Pontiff; his helpers—the Bishops; of Bishops—pastors; of pastors—assistant priests [sotrudnyky]; all these as ministers of Christ on their part contribute unto the labor of fishing for souls that are to be ferried unto the shore of eternity. Where therefore a Pastor is not able himself to govern his parish, the Bishop is bound to assign him assistants, who, although they have not ordinary jurisdiction in the parish, but are only subordinate unto the pastor, nevertheless, on account of the commonality of the sacred order, it is fitting that they should shine with qualities similar unto pastors. And that between the Pastor and the Assistant there may exist the greatest possible concord, for lack of which a shameful desolation arises in a parish, the Synod feels bound in the Lord to prescribe a mutual rule of duties for both. Namely: unto the pastor, that he treat his assistant as his fellow-companion in Christ, with kindness, gentleness, and benevolence, guarding against proud domineering over him; nay more, striving that both the members of his household and all parishioners treat him with all respect; and as for the assistant himself, that as a younger minister, he gradually guide him, when opportunity offers, with his counsels in the directing of souls and administration of the parish.
2. In addition, the Pastor ought to watch over the life and conduct of his assistant both at home and outside the house; nevertheless he ought not immediately to proceed against his faults harshly, and much less publicly, but only privately between four eyes admonish him paternally, and only report an incorrigible one unto the dean or the Ordinary.
3. Finally, because the vicar of a pastor is not properly a hireling, but his fellow-worker, and a partaker in the labors

in the vineyard of the Lord, the pastor therefore ought not to lay the whole burden of labor upon his shoulders, but divide it by a just apportionment between himself and him in such wise that both jointly bear the yoke of the Lord; yet in such wise that under pretext of labor, for the obtaining of greater gain, the pastor do not retain for himself almost all celebrations furnished with stipends, while the assistants be deprived of their fruits.
4. Finally, that on account of material revenues there may be no disputes between the Pastor and the Assistant, the Synod commands Pastors, that both for the good of mutual peace and of the parishioners, as also for good example and the manifestation of justice, they observe the custom of those pious pastors who, of all revenues collected in common, give unto their assistants a third part thereof. In particular as to the Divine Liturgies, their stipends shall belong exclusively and in their entirety unto those unto whom the faithful without restriction offer them and who celebrate the Divine Liturgies; yet in such wise that neither the Pastor hinder, and much less forbid, liturgical stipends to be offered unto the Assistants, nor the Assistants hinder such stipends from being offered unto the Pastor.
5. Unto Assistants the Synod prescribes, that they remember well that they are lower in office, and usually also in age and experience, than Pastors; therefore they ought to render unto them from the heart the honor of filial affection, and by their manner of conduct strive also to gain for pastors the respect, love, and confidence of others [^195].
6. The Assistant ought to manifest obedience unto his Pastor and be always ready to supply the place of the Pastor; besides this let Assistants remember that ordinary authority in the administration of the parish doth not belong unto them, but unto Pastors, and therefore let them not arrogate unto themselves any authority to dispose at will of the affairs of the parish, and let them not dare to introduce anything new into the parish without their consent.

7. But if it should appear unto them that for the good and salvation of the faithful something better or more beneficial ought to be done, they shall present the same with all modesty and subordination unto the Pastor, and strive to incline him unto agreement thereto.
8. Finally, let them not dare to absent themselves from the place without permission of the Pastor, but only with his knowledge and permission, and that on each occasion; the Pastor himself shall be able to grant permission for three days, so that in this manner neither the Pastor nor the parishioners may be deprived of the assistance of the Assistant in the work of eternal salvation.

### Titulus VIII: On Sacred Seminaries

TITULUS VIII.
On Sacred Seminaries.

If at all times the greatest vigilance and special diligence were necessary to be employed, in order that all those who desire to war in the camp of the Lord should be piously and holily educated, and thoroughly instructed in the best disciplines, then surely it is a secret unto no one how greatly it concerns both the realm of Christ and the civil state, that so salutary a work should everywhere be supported with redoubled zeal, especially in these exceedingly difficult times, wherein the good of the Church urgently requires that from day to day the number of the best priests should increase, who, shining with the adornment of all virtues and possessing sound and solid learning, may be able to fulfill the duties of their order piously and with knowledge, diligently instruct the Christian people, take thorough care for the salvation of souls, guide those who err into the way of truth and righteousness, and watchfully and skillfully defend the cause of God and of the Church; and unmask the deceits of insidious men, refute errors, overthrow ignorance and rashness, and crush assaults [^196].

That we may the more surely and at the same time the more successfully attain this, so that according to the mind of the Holy Apostolic See the Church of God in this Ruthenian ecclesiastical Province may always have a sufficient number of churchmen who, mighty in deed and word, may courageously and diligently fight the battle of the Lord, and who may fulfill all the parts of their duty, so manifold and arduous, piously and skillfully, the Fathers of this Synod have judged it best to establish the most precise rules concerning the education of clerics; inasmuch as upon the right education of clerics depends the right education of the Christian people.

### Chapter I: On Minor Seminaries

CHAPTER I.
On Minor Seminaries.

1. Inasmuch as a priest for the most part hath such an end in life as he had a beginning from childhood, and: "There are ways before a man, and he loves not to turn away from them" [^197], or according to the Vulgate: "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it" [^198], it unquestionably therefore matters much, that future ministers of the Church from their tender years should with special care be inclined unto piety and learning. For this reason this Synod decrees, that in this ecclesiastical Province of ours at least one minor seminary [seminary for boys] shall be founded, unto which youths from the Metropolitan Diocese and from the dioceses of the other Suffragans may have access.
2. And in order that, as custom and the need of the time require, the Minor Seminary may be adapted unto a more detailed rule and therefore be able to bring greater benefit unto the Church, this Synod deems it well to add that which pertains unto the governance and administration of such an institution, as also unto the method of studies and religious direction of life.
3. Since the Minor Seminary is founded as a nursery, as it were, of piety to be cultivated and of priestly character to be formed, for the purpose that boys may be trained unto innocence of life, godliness, modesty, and the ecclesiastical spirit

and at the same time learn the arts and higher sciences,—the Bishops therefore shall first of all apply every diligence and attention, that in the preparatory seminary there be appointed superiors and teachers distinguished by virtue and morals, zeal and wisdom, no less than by talents and learning [^199].
4. The superiors and teachers shall strive with all exertion and all labor, that the pupils from day to day may grow in true and thorough learning, in faith and piety; let them strive to awaken in the students a love for study, and at the same time foster a spirit of discipline and work. Moreover, let them strive with all diligence toward this, that youths from early childhood, divesting themselves more and more of the worldly spirit, may be imbued with the ecclesiastical spirit; let them instill into their spirit proper respect, love, and honor for the clerical state; let them diligently apply labor, that no less by example than by precepts they may form and confirm in them a true and firm disposition for prayer, love, humility, obedience, uprightness, and blamelessness; from the very threshold of the spiritual course let them be guides unto them in all their works, to be fulfilled out of love for God in such wise that care for discipline may be love, and love the guardian of laws [^200]; let them teach them to approach the Holy Mysteries devoutly, to pay adoration unto the Most Holy Mysteries, to revere devoutly the Most Blessed Virgin, to be attentively and devoutly present at the Eucharistic Sacrifice, to meditate with profit, and to read spiritual books. Diligently let them strive that the rules for the governance of Seminaries, to be established by this Synod, be accurately observed by all; whereby it shall come to pass, that in the pupils there shall be formed also a sense of order, and they shall early accustom themselves to preserve order in all things most diligently.—Diligently let them oversee the students committed unto them, whether when they are engaged in study or when they give themselves unto recreations, for upon untiring vigilance

most of all depends the preservation of morality, the correction of character, and progress in studies [^201].
5. The superiors of the Seminary shall also in this apply diligence, that the boys learn the rules of propriety and practice every courtesy. If therefore in their manners they should notice anything unpolished and coarse, improper and discordant, let them strive to correct and remove it for the better. Truly Christian propriety and gentleness of manners, which proceed from love and humility, are an ornament and dignity for clerics and bring not a little luster unto their learning and piety, and in the end effect this, that the ministers of God become beloved unto men and can the more easily win them for Christ.
6. If there should be found any who possess not talents or a spirit suited unto the priestly state, who are not devoted unto piety and virtue—who know not discipline, manifesting a conceited or obstinate disposition, or giving scandal unto others whether by words or deeds,—and who, having been frequently admonished, do not amend themselves for the better, let them be expelled from the Seminary [^202].
7. That they may already from youth become accustomed unto priestly customs and practice the rites which are to be strictly and accurately observed, the pupils shall serve at the sacred functions in the choir of the chapel, and besides this let them practice liturgical chant throughout the whole course of education.
8. For the rest, the Bishops, when they desire to establish a Minor Seminary, shall strive with every effort for the means necessary for the accomplishment of this most salutary work. Since however it is very difficult that they should be able to bear the expenses necessary for this by their own resources, let them cherish a firm hope that the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith, unto which the above-mentioned work lies deeply at heart, will come unto their assistance.

### Chapter II: On Major Seminaries

CHAPTER II.
On Major Seminaries.

1. In the Minor Seminary the pupils in some measure begin the clerical life, but in the Major Seminaries they are brought, as it were, unto perfection. For in these are most immediately prepared those who are to be the light of the world and the salt of the earth, and leaders of peoples, who, as with the two-edged sword of piety and learning, should fight steadfastly for the truth and combat errors unconquerably; who, mighty in deed and word, might govern and guard the vineyard of the Lord. Above all, therefore, let the Bishops have at heart solicitude for the Major Seminary, let them distinguish them with fatherly care, and let them guard them as the apple of their eye.
2. But since in this ecclesiastical province of ours there is one Major Seminary for all the Dioceses, therefore the Most Reverend Metropolitan together with the Suffragan Bishops shall labor with all diligence, that everything pertaining unto its governance and discipline, according to the demands of the time and in the spirit of the Ecumenical Council of Trent, be accurately and promptly ordered.
3. For this reason let the Bishops diligently watch, that the governance of both Seminaries be committed unto men who are distinguished by blamelessness of morals, gravity, experience, and wisdom, and eminent in piety, zeal, and all priestly virtues; who unite firmness of spirit in maintaining discipline with gentleness and amiability; who apply all diligence and vigilance, that all superiors and servants of the Seminary fulfill their duties properly.
4. That the Rector of the Seminary especially may be able properly to fulfill all this, let him not accept any other duties, whether ecclesiastical or secular, but let him be wholly devoted unto the governance of the Seminary, undistracted by any other occupation [^203]. Likewise let the Bishops

diligently strive that the spiritual director or Confessor (*Dukhovnyk*) be most qualified for directing the conscience and morals of the seminarians. His duty shall be to instruct the seminarians concerning the duties pertaining unto the priestly state, concerning sanctity of life, concerning zeal for souls, concerning the denial of one's own will, concerning true obedience due unto superiors, concerning love of neighbor and most of all toward companions, concerning love of God, the Most Blessed Virgin Mary, and the Saints, and concerning the duties of piety with regard unto them. In addition let the Spiritual Director teach the seminarians, that they run not after dignities and honors, and that the things of the world are vain. Above all he ought so to attach the souls of the seminarians unto himself, that they themselves openly disclose their innermost thoughts unto him, and that whenever they are oppressed by disquietude of spirit, they may know that they have a most loving father, who can offer true consolation.
Besides this, let the Most Reverend Metropolitan together with the Most Reverend Bishops take care, that in both seminaries there be a diligent house-administrator [procurator / *zavidatel domu*], who shall properly care for the proper maintenance of the seminarians and of others living in the Seminary, as also for the other temporal needs of this institution. Let him so administer his office that, while duly providing for persons, he may turn the revenues of the Seminary unto its benefit.
5. By reason of their offices, the Rector of the Seminary, the Spiritual Director, and the other Superiors are bound to reside in the Seminary, and being provided with maintenance and other things necessary for life therefrom, they cannot give themselves unto any other occupations, except if for very grave reasons the Most Reverend Metropolitan should judge otherwise.
6. For the office of teaching, let the Bishops elect teachers of the sciences (Professors of Theology), who are distinguished by talent, learning, piety, and stability of morals; who, constantly devoted unto studies, bear the yoke of the rule and the burden of a laborious life with a cheerful spirit, and in the exact observance of order give guidance unto the seminarians; who teach the young seminarians both by example and by word humility, avoidance of the world, love of labor and of solitude, diligent practice in prayer; who show themselves most capable not only of delivering

instruction free from all error, but also of kindling the spirit of the students with zeal for the glory of God and the salvation of souls.
7. As to the superiors of the lower Seminary or Vice-Rectors and Prefects of discipline, let the Most Reverend Bishops, having taken the counsel of the Rector, elect and appoint them. It shall be the duty of Vice-Rectors to assist the Rector in all things and in his absence to supply his person. It is the duty of Prefects to dwell in the very same lodging together with the seminarians day and night. And that their vigilance may be profitable, individual divisions (rooms) ought not to contain more than about 15 seminarians. Their office is to watch over the observance of the rules, to guard the schedule of hours appointed for individual occupations; and that the same may be most accurately observed, to permit no one to leave the room without grave necessity. Let the Prefects see that in the time appointed for study and quiet, the seminarians observe silence, and that in the time of recreation they carry on no useless, or unseemly, or political conversations, but only such as befit piety and the life of clerics, and that they engage in no amusements that are not suitable for persons consecrated unto God. But if any abuses should creep into a division (room), let them endeavor to remove them as quickly as possible; and if that should become impossible, let them report unto the Rector, who according to his office ought to provide a remedy. In all this the so-called Censor supplies the place of the Prefect in his absence, with the permission of the Rector.
8. Whenever the seminarians must go forth from the seminary unto a public place, whether to take part in the choir of the cathedral church, or for a walk appointed in the schedule of hours, or to attend lectures at the university for any division, let them proceed in pairs by two, accompanied by a Prefect.
9. It is necessary by all means to endeavor that the seminarians during vacation time remain in the Seminary with the superiors, even as was observed in the beginnings. But, so long as this cannot be attained, then lest the seminarians during vacation time lose that benefit of right training which

they have attained in the Seminary, let the Superiors, when vacation time approaches, carefully instruct them in what manner, in all modesty and holiness, they ought to dwell among relatives and cohabitants, what dangers to avoid, that they may preserve themselves unspotted from this world; unto what occupation of the spirit in free time they ought to give themselves, that they may not pine in idleness, whence so many errors grow; by what exercises of piety, finally, they ought daily to occupy themselves, that they may not expose themselves unto the danger of inconstancy. We admonish Pastors, that during vacation time they oversee the seminarians and employ them for teaching the elements of the Christian faith unto children, in choral functions, and other services of that kind pertaining unto the praise of God. Upon the conclusion of vacations the Pastor is bound in conscience to report in a sealed letter unto the Most Reverend Metropolitan concerning the conduct of the seminarians who resided in his parish, and concerning their manner of life, concerning their approach unto the Holy Mysteries, and concerning their diligence in other sacred functions, and whether they wore attire which is suitable for clerics. And that all this may be faithfully and accurately observed, the Bishops assembled in this Synod command, that the rules drawn up by the Metropolitan Ordinariate and presented in this Synod, examined in general deliberation, and furnished with the authority of this Synod, shall be observed by all and singular who administer the Seminary. For the faithful execution of all rules, especially for the removal of abuses if such should creep in, and for the firm and religious maintenance of discipline in the Seminaries, the Metropolitan shall deign to visit the Seminary frequently in the year [^204].
11. But since no man ought to take honor unto himself, unless he be called of God, as was Aaron [^205], nay more, as Christ the Lord Himself, therefore in the admission of youth unto Sacred Seminaries, it is necessary above all to have conviction concerning their vocation unto the clerical state; for the obtaining whereof, the Bishops shall require from gymnasium catechists the most accurate report

concerning their morality, ability, and comprehensive conduct, as also concerning the signs testifying unto their inclination and bent toward the clerical state. In addition let the local pastors diligently observe and direct the life, abilities, and conduct of those youths who reside in their parish during vacation time; and in case they are to be admitted unto the clerical state, and they should judge them unfit for such a calling, they are bound to inform the Ordinariate through testimonials.
12. For the rest, that they may be the more thoroughly convinced concerning such a vocation, the superiors of Seminaries shall watch over individual youths, as also over their life, that it be suitable and in accord with their calling; for which purpose the superiors also ought to know that they are burdened in conscience as to accurate knowledge of the life of the seminarians, and for this purpose they shall at appointed times render a report concerning each of them in common meetings of the rectorate, and draw up concerning the conduct of each individual written tables, which each year are to be submitted unto the Ordinary; and if it should be ascertained that any of the seminarians manifests not signs of a priestly vocation, or defiles the same by deeds contrary unto this calling, then such, if they should prove incorrigible, let them be expelled in good time from the seminary.
13. This Synod indeed firmly professes that the celibate state is more perfect than the married state, according to the words of the Apostle: "He that is unmarried cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is married cares for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife; he is divided" [^206]. Since however the Catholic Church for grave reasons hath permitted and doth permit, that clerics of our rite, before ordination or installation in major orders, have freedom, according to the grace given them by God, either to abide always in celibacy, which would be best, or to marry a maiden: the Synod, recognizing this freedom and leaving it inviolate, nevertheless in view of the benefit and need of our Church, admonishes the superiors of Seminaries, that seminarians well disposed toward the acceptance

## 4. Scholarly Critical Apparatus & Footnotes

[^184]: Appendix XXXIV (*Додатокъ ч. 34*) of the Synodal Acts: Official Statutes of the Metropolitan Cathedral Chapter of Lviv (*Statuta Capituli Metropolitani Leopolensis*), approved by the Sacred Congregation *de Propaganda Fide pro negotiis Ritus Orientalis* on September 4, 1875, signed by Cardinal Alessandro Franchi, Prefect, and Archbishop Gaetano Aloisi Masella, Secretary. Book p. 198 .

[^185]: Printed marginal note: *Which indeed was already accomplished in the year 1894* (*Що и стало ся вже р. 1894*). By formal decree of the Sacred Congregation *de Propaganda Fide* in 1894, the Statutes of the Greek Catholic Cathedral Chapter of Peremyshl were submitted and canonically confirmed. Book p. 199 .

[^186]: Printed marginal note: *This also was already accomplished in 1894. The statutes of both episcopal Chapters have been confirmed* (*Се такожь вже стало ся 1894 р. Статуты обохъ еписк. Капитулъ подтвердженô*), referring to the Holy See's confirmation of the statutes of the Cathedral Chapters of Peremyshl and Stanyslaviv. Book p. 199 .

[^187]: Printed cross-reference: *See the statutes of the Chapter of the Metropolitan Church of Lviv, Appendix 34* (*зри статуты Капитулы Церкви Митроп Львôвскои Додат. 34*). Book p. 199 .

[^188]: Luke 12:48 — "For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more" (*Ємуже будетъ дано много, много взыщется отъ него* / *Omni autem cui multum datum est, multum quaeretur ab eo*). Book p. 199 .

[^189]: 1 Timothy 5:18 — "The laborer is worthy of his reward" (*Достоинъ дѣлатель мзды своея* / *Dignus est operarius mercede sua*), citing the Pauline apostolic principle of pastoral justice and material support for clergy. Book p. 200 .

[^190]: Acts of the Apostles 1:1 — "The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach" (*Первое убо слово сотворихъ о всѣхъ, о Ѳеофиле, яже начатъ Іисусъ творити же и учити* / *Primum quidem sermonem feci de omnibus, o Theophile, quae coepit Jesus facere et docere*). Book p. 202 .

[^191]: 2 Timothy 4:2 — "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine" (*Проповѣдуй слово, насто́й благовременнѣ и безвременнѣ, обличи, запрети, умоли со всякимъ долготерпѣніемъ и ученіемъ* / *Praedica verbum, insta opportune, importune: argue, obsecra, increpa in omni patientia, et doctrina*). Book p. 203 .

[^192]: Apocalypse (Book of Revelation) 2:14–16 — The solemn divine warning and judgment addressed unto the Angel (Bishop) of the Church in Pergamum against tolerating the doctrine of Balaam, stumbling blocks, and the deeds of the Nicolaitans. Book p. 204 .

[^193]: Ruthenian Provincial Synod of Zamość (1720), Titulus X *De parochis* (On Pastors), obliging every pastor to maintain four distinct parish registers (*чотыри книги* / *quatuor libri parochiales*): the register of baptisms (*Liber Baptizatorum*), confirmations (*Liber Confirmatorum*), marriages (*Liber Copulatorum*), and the deceased (*Liber Mortuorum*). Book p. 205 .

[^194]: Luke 5:5 — "Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at Thy word I will let down the net" (*Наставниче, об нощь всю труждьшеся, ничесоже яхомъ: по глаголу же Твоему ввергу мрежу* / *Praeceptor, per totam noctem laborantes, nihil cepimus: in verbo autem tuo laxabo rete*). Book p. 205 .

[^195]: Provincial Council of Prague (1860), Titulus VI, Chapter 8 *On Parochial Vicars and Assistants* (*De vicariis et cooperatoribus*), prescribing filial obedience, sincere cooperation, and mutual harmony between parochial assistants / curates and parish pastors. Book p. 207 .

[^196]: Pope Pius IX, Apostolic Letter *Caelestium munerum dispensatio* (July 1, 1873), establishing the Pontifical Seminary of Pius IV (Seminario Pio) in Rome for the ascetical, theological, and disciplinary formation of candidates for the sacred priesthood. Book p. 208 .

[^197]: Proverbs 22:15 (Septuagint versification: *Притч. 22:15 LXX*): "There are ways before a man, and he loves not to turn away from them; but foolishness is tied to the heart of a youth, and the rod of correction shall drive it far from him" (*Суть путіе предъ мужемъ, и не любитъ возвратити ся отъ нихъ*). Book p. 209 .

[^198]: Proverbs 22:6 (Vulgate: *Proverbia 22:6*): "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it" (*Adolescens juxta viam suam etiam cum senuerit non recedet ab ea*). Book p. 209 .

[^199]: Third Plenary Council of Baltimore (1884), Titulus V *De clericorum educatione et instructione*, Caput I *De seminariis minoribus* (nos. 139–152), enacting canonical norms requiring seminary superiors and professors to be distinguished by mature piety, exemplary morals, prudence, and sacred learning. Book p. 210 .

[^200]: Wisdom of Solomon 6:19 (Septuagint versification: Wisdom 6:19 LXX; Wisdom 6:18 MT/Vulgate): "And the care of discipline is love; and love is the keeping of her laws; and the giving heed unto her laws is the assurance of incorruption" (*Попеченіе же о наказаніи любы, любы же сохраненіе законовъ ея* / *Cura ergo disciplinae dilectio est: et dilectio custodia legum illius est*). Book p. 210 .

[^201]: Comparative conciliar legislation: Provincial Council of Cologne (1860), Titulus IV *De Seminariis*; Provincial Council of Tours (1856); and Third Plenary Council of Baltimore (1884), Titulus V: emphasizing constant vigilance over student morals, Christian civility, and academic progress. Book p. 211 .

[^202]: Ibid., Provincial Councils of Cologne, Tours, and Baltimore: decreeing the timely expulsion of incorrigible seminarians exhibiting obstinacy, contempt for discipline, or moral scandal. Book p. 211 .

[^203]: Third Plenary Council of Baltimore (1884), Titulus V, Caput II *De seminariis majoribus*, no. 156: prohibiting seminary rectors and resident superiors from accepting extraneous ecclesiastical or civil duties that divide their attention from the governance of the seminary. Book p. 212 .

[^204]: Appendix XXXV (*Додатокъ ч. 35*) of the Synodal Acts: General Statutes and Rules of the Greek Catholic Seminary (*Statuta et Regulae Seminarii Generalis Leopolensis*), approved and confirmed by the Synod of 1891. Book p. 215 .

[^205]: Hebrews 5:4 — "And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (*И никтоже самъ себѣ пріемлетъ честь, но званный отъ Бога, якоже и Ааронъ* / *Nec quisquam sumit sibi honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo, tamquam Aaron*). Book p. 215 .

[^206]: 1 Corinthians 7:32–33 — "He that is unmarried cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is married cares for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife" (*Не оженивыйся печется о Господнихъ, како угодити Господеви: а оженивыйся печется о мірскихъ, како угодити женѣ. Раздѣлися жена и дѣва* / *Qui sine uxore est, sollicitus est quae Domini sunt, quomodo placeat Deo. Qui autem cum uxore est, sollicitus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat uxori: et divisus est*). Book p. 216 .

---

# Acts and Decrees of the Ruthenian Provincial Synod of Lviv (1891)

### Titulus VII (Concluded): On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy
### Chapter VII (Concluded): On Seminaries

of celibacy, shall by favorable and prudent counsel restrain and confirm them in that resolution.
14. Those of the seminarians however who desire to embrace the state of matrimony shall not dare to do this sooner than after having duly completed all theological studies and having already been dismissed from the seminary; which is to be understood also concerning betrothal itself, and that under penalty of exclusion from the reception of Sacred Orders. For two things are to be feared from such premature contracting of matrimony: namely, the turning away of minds from diligent application unto studies, and estrangement from the due cultivation of piety; for a spirit distracted by lusts cannot diligently apply itself thereto. Furthermore, an excessively vehement desire to marry before the reception of Sacred Orders makes dedication unto the state of celibacy at least unsuited, and perchance also odious.
15. As to the observance of discipline, this is accurately set forth in the rules themselves, whereby therefore, as with a powerful engine, governance is to be directed toward the full and perfect formation of the seminarians; in particular, the superiors of the seminaries shall watch that the seminarians frequently, and if possible every week, as is commonly done in seminaries, or at least twice in a month, approach the Mystery of Penance and the Most Holy Eucharist, that they make daily meditation for at least half an hour, spiritual reading, and examination of conscience, and in their proper time perform spiritual retreats, and finally that they be devoutly present daily at the Divine Liturgy and fail not to visit the Most Holy Gifts, all of which shall take place in common. But whereas the Lord hath placed the fullness of all good in Mary [^207], and whereas He hath granted unto Her so much grace as suffices for the salvation of all [^208], therefore doth this Synod earnestly desire that the seminarians be inflamed with true devotion toward that same most glorious Mother of our Lord; and it strictly enjoins upon the spiritual director that he frequently form them unto that precious devotion by suitable discourses, and endeavor by all means

to preserve and maintain in its vigor the Sodality recently established in the Seminary of Lviv under the title: "Presentation of the Most Pure Virgin in the Temple," which was endowed by the Most Holy Father Pope Leo XIII with many indulgences and a privileged altar, unto the end that under the patronage of the Most Holy Virgin, who was once reared in the Temple, the seminarians may in the seminary be imbued with a like spirit of devotion, and afterwards, having gone forth from it, may be able by example, word, and deed to bring forth Christ the Lord in the hearts of men.
16. As to scholarly pursuits, in addition to those which professors publicly teach in schools, those same superiors shall take care that the seminarians in turn practice the composing and delivering of sermons, and moreover that they be thoroughly instructed in the frequent reading of Holy Scripture in the Church Slavonic tongue, as also in the grammar of that tongue, and no less in the science and celebration of the rites and church chant of our Church.
Whereas upon the exact observance of seminary discipline depends almost the entire fruit and success of the faithful and of the whole nation, therefore both the Bishops and the other superiors of the seminaries shall direct their entire labor and endeavor unto this, that that discipline be duly observed, and shall themselves both by word and deed stimulate the seminarians unto the same, considering all this in spirit: that nothing is more pleasing unto God, nor more profitable unto the Church and society, than due solicitude for the seminary and the skillful and proper education of clerics in all virtues, sciences, and Christian manners.

### Titulus IX: On Priests
### Chapter I: On the Dignity of a Priest of the New Testament

TITULUS IX.

CHAPTER I.
On the Dignity of a Priest of the New Testament.

1. That which the divinely inspired Sirach writes in the Book of Wisdom concerning the height and glory of the first High Priest of the law of shadows pertains unto every priest of the Gospel law—

as holy Fathers Augustine [^209] and Gregory the Great [^210] assert. For thus Sirach writes concerning Aaron the brother of Moses [^211]: "He exalted Aaron, a holy man like unto him, his brother... He gave him the priesthood of the people, and blessed him with splendid ornament." And afterwards, having described the wondrous costliness and beauty of the sacred vestments, he continues thus: "Their sacrifices were burned every day twice continually... He chose him out of all men living to offer sacrifice unto the Lord, incense, and a sweet savor for a memorial, to make reconciliation for his people. He gave unto him His commandments, and authority in the covenants of judgments, to teach Jacob the testimonies, and to enlighten Israel in His law [^212]." What is more, every priest of the New Testament is so much higher and more glorious than Aaron as reality exceeds the shadow. For he is chosen by God out of the general multitude of the human race, that he may offer sacrifices unto Him, and that not of calves, or of goats, or of fragrant material incense, to be consumed indeed by fire coming down from heaven, yet material; but the sacrifice of the unblemished Body and the most precious Blood of the very Only-Begotten Son of God for an odor of sweetness penetrating the clouds and ascending even unto the throne of God, to be consumed by a fire far more wondrous, as St. Chrysostom saith [^213], that is, by the Holy Spirit, transforming the proposed gifts. For the Lord, rejecting the sacrifices of the Old Testament together with its priests, glorifies Himself concerning this alone in Malachi [^214], saying: "I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord Almighty, neither will I accept a sacrifice at your hands; for from the rising of the sun even unto the going down thereof My name is glorified among the Gentiles; and in every place incense is offered unto My name, and a pure sacrifice: for My name is great among the Gentiles, saith the Lord Almighty." Likewise also at the changing of bread and wine into the most honorable Body and Blood of the Lord, the priest shows himself to be a far greater and more frequent worker of miracles than was Moses at the turning of the Egyptian rivers into blood and his staff into a serpent. Admiring this, the renowned Teacher of Africa, St. Augustine, exclaims: "O re-

verend dignity of priests, in whose hands the Son of God is incarnate, as it were in the Virgin's womb!" And again: "O venerable holiness of hands! O happy exercise! He Who created me, if it be lawful so to speak, gave unto me to create Himself; and He Who created me without me, created Himself through me!" [^215]. But what shall we say concerning the power of the priest over the Mystical Body of Christ, or over the Church? If the justification of the ungodly, as St. Thomas teaches, is the greatest work of God, then the priest who absolves a man from sins performs a greater work than the creating of heaven and earth, even as St. Augustine also previously taught, saying: "It is a greater work to make a righteous man out of an ungodly man than to create heaven and earth" [^216].
2. Gathering all this together, Cyril III, Metropolitan of Kyiv, in the middle of the 13th century in his Synod thus addressed the priests: "Hear, O holy council of priests, for unto you do I turn my words: Ye are called earthly angels and heavenly men; ye together with the angels stand at the altar of the Lord; ye with the Seraphim bear the Lord; ye bring down the Holy Spirit from heaven, and change the bread into the Body of Christ, and the wine into the Blood of Christ!... Ye bind on earth, and God doth not loose in heaven; ye loose on earth, and God doth not bind in heaven. Through you doth God accomplish the mystery of the salvation of the human race; you hath He Himself appointed as watchmen and pastors of His sheep, for whom He poured out His most precious blood" [^217].
3. But although the priest of the New Testament is not clothed with such fair material garments as Aaron, yet is he clothed with raiment far more precious, immaterial, the author whereof is not man, but the Holy Spirit Himself, and clad in Whose vesture the priest confesses himself in the prayer of the Cherubic Hymn, praying: "And strengthen me by the power of the Holy Spirit, clad with the grace of the priesthood": and before the Holy Liturgy, at the putting on of the sticharion (*stikhar*), in the person of the Church, the Bride of Christ, and in the person of Christ, the Bridegroom

of the Church [^218], saying: "My soul shall exult in the Lord, for He hath clothed me with the garment of salvation, and with the robe of gladness hath He covered me; He hath set a crown upon me as upon a bridegroom, and as a bride hath He adorned me with beauty" [^219].
4. But unto the dignity of so lofty an excellence ought to correspond excellence of life, that is, a constellation of virtues and a treasure of sacred learning, wherewith, as if with two wings, the priest, being provided, in the fulfillment of his office soars aloft, and which were prefigured in the very vestments of Aaron.

### Chapter II: On the Righteousness of Life of a Priest

CHAPTER II.
On the Righteousness of Life of a Priest.

1. The constellation of virtues wherewith a priest ought to shine is derived by St. Thomas from the eight sacred garments of Aaron, in such wise that the breeches (*nadrahy*) signify chastity; the linen tunic, purity of life; the girdle, moderation in choice; the tiara or mitre, rectitude of intention; the golden plate upon the forehead, unceasing remembrance of God in meditation; the shoulder-pieces (*naramennyk*), bearing the infirmities of the people upon oneself; the breastplate, solicitude of love which they ought to bear in their heart and bosom toward the people. The hyacinth-blue tunic signifies heavenly conversation through works of perfection. Afterwards he adds, saying: for this cause also there are attached unto the hem of the hyacinth tunic golden bells, whereby is signified the knowledge of divine things, which ought to be joined unto the heavenly conversation of the High Priest; there are joined likewise pomegranates, whereby are expressed unity of faith and concord in good morals, since his doctrine ought to be so conjoined that the unity of faith and peace may not be severed through it [^220]. Likewise the ecumenical teacher St. Cyril of Alexandria similarly explains the signification of the bells and pomegranates (in the book: *De adoratione in spiritu et veritate*), writing: "For those golden bells and cities' pomegranates are by no means an obscure riddle of saving preaching. For even as a

city is indeed surrounded by a single wall on the outside, but contains far more houses within itself, in that very same manner a pomegranate is surrounded by a single outer rind only, but within the seeds are separated among themselves by delicate membranes, as if by walls, and I might almost say they cluster like little houses. A bell therefore is joined unto each pomegranate, for each city also hath its own Teacher, who by the sound and harmony of divine teachings might proclaim unto all the entrance of our Savior into the Holy of Holies." For the dread of death threatened those who were charged with performing the priestly office in the tabernacle, namely Aaron, if the bells should not resound to the uttermost. For silence is especially perilous for Teachers, and this is evidently that concerning which St. Paul saith: "For woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel." And St. Jerome adds: "Such ought to be the learning and knowledge of the High Priest of God that both his walk and his gestures and everything should be a preaching. Let him understand the truth with his mind, and proclaim it by his whole posture and dress, so that whatever he does, whatever he speaks, may be instruction for the nations: for without bells and diverse colors, and precious stones and flowers of virtues, he cannot enter into the Holy Place, nor possess the name of Superior" [^221].
In particular, as to the righteousness of life, the Synod sets forth for priests the following precepts for observance: first, in the house of God; next, in their own house; and finally, outside the house, that they may know what they ought most of all to avoid and what to perform.
2. "Of all priests," saith St. Leo the Great, "the choice is so excellent that that which in other members of the Church is free from guilt, in them is nevertheless regarded as unlawful" [^222]. Therefore justly doth the holy Council of Trent [^223] so wisely declare concerning the life of priests: "There is nothing that doth more continually dispose others unto piety and divine worship than the life and example of those who have dedicated themselves unto the service of God. For when they are seen to be raised above the affairs of this world unto a higher sta-

tion, the rest turn their eyes upon them as into a mirror, and take from them that which they ought to imitate. Therefore it behoves clerics, called unto the lot of the Lord's ministry, so to order their entire life and morals that by their dress, gesture, walk, speech, and all other things they may show forth only that which is grave, moderate, and full of religion; let them avoid even slight faults, which in them would be very great, so that their actions may awaken reverence in all." And to begin with that which a priest ought to avoid, then—first: in the house of God and the church, or during sacred actions, they shall not converse, nor gaze curiously upon the faithful; they shall not celebrate sacred actions, especially the awe-inspiring Sacrifice, superficially, distractedly, hastily, and with an absent, dissipated mind; and the holy rites themselves they shall perform uniformly, and execute accurately according to the exemplar which this Synod presents for observance in the rubric specially prepared for that purpose. Furthermore, during sacred actions they shall not scold anyone; they shall not forget also to render honor or reverences (prostrations / *metanias*) before the Most Holy Gifts, not haphazard, but profound; they shall not approach the celebration of the Holy Liturgy without preparation and in a state of distraction, or without a cassock (*reverenda*) and without a collar (*oboychyk*), or with disheveled hair, or with a beard untrimmed for several days, or in torn garments and soiled vestments; nor shall they dare to celebrate sacred actions on unclean vessels; and finally, in the house of God, where His Only-Begotten Son Himself dwells with a multitude of angels present, they shall not behave themselves as in human dwellings.
3. At home they shall not neglect the recitation of the Canonical Hours, and they shall not approach the table without prayer, nor depart from it without having given thanks; and priests shall not cease to watch that all members of the family and servants do not pass their lives without daily exercises of piety, that on feast days they fail not to be present at divine services and at appointed times receive the Holy Mysteries; let them endeavor to preserve peace and concord in their house among all members, mindful of the words of the holy

Apostle, saying [^224]: "For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?" Moreover, this present Synod strictly commands that on fast days, and especially on feast days and temple patronal feasts on which fasting is prescribed, such as: on the day of the Exaltation of the Honorable Cross, the Beheading of St. John the Baptist, and others, priests themselves shall not eat meat, whether openly or secretly, nor tolerate that others eat it, and that on such days they shall not permit dancing and music to be held in their house or among the faithful. An evil example given in this matter by a pastor exceedingly scandalizes the faithful and leads them unto depreciation of religion and of the authority of the priest himself; likewise the priests themselves, on the occasion of recreation during any feast, shall not forget that they will celebrate the Divine Liturgy on the following day, and that it behoves them to be fasting from midnight; likewise they shall avoid games of hazard at cards, played with excessive stakes and for the sake of obtaining gain; likewise they shall not engage in hunting, for such an occupation betrays a worldly spirit and levity, incompatible with the dignity of those who on every occasion ought to be fishers of souls by the spotlessness of their life, after the example of St. Josaphat and St. Cajetan, who among the people earned for themselves the name of hunters and catchers of souls. Theatrical performances, dances, and other public spectacles, which frequently cannot be reconciled with the holiness of the priestly life and cannot be visited without scandal to the people, priests must avoid. Appearing publicly, they shall preserve both in dress and in deportment such modesty and gravity as corresponds unto their station; in particular, as to dress, priests shall wear a long garment, that is, a cassock (*reverenda*) with a collar (*oboychyk*), not only during sacred actions, but also outside of them, whenever they assemble for public functions, whether ecclesiastical or civil; yet appearing on other occasions publicly, they may indeed wear shorter dress, but not according to the worldly cut, but according to the regulation indicated unto the clergy by the Ordinariates of this our province, the color of which garment

shall be black or darkish, which ought to be observed also as to head coverings; and in this matter, even as on the one hand immoderate, superfluous elegance is to be avoided, so on the other hand is all neglect; but unto such dress the priestly collar (*oboychyk*) must belong, and not something else according to the custom of the laity. Moreover, priests shall not dare to wear a full beard or side-whiskers. Walking upon public roads, and especially in towns, they shall not permit themselves ostentatiously to perform such actions as they could not do without scandalizing others whether within domestic walls—in a house—or within the precinct of villages: for example, smoking, talking loudly, or making immoderate and unbecoming gestures.
4. At home they shall not perform such labors as are proper unto the lowest servants, and they shall not immerse themselves excessively in purely secular affairs, even though otherwise honorable, such as the medical or surgical art and the like; and they shall not summon the faithful, without very grave cause and permission of the Ordinariate, unto public secular courts; at public markets they shall so conduct themselves that they manage nothing of such sort before the people, nor conduct transactions in selling or purchasing in such a manner that they would appear to be merchants of temporal things; but in necessities of that kind let them employ some honest man who may transact those affairs in their stead, mindful of the words of the Apostle unto Timothy [^225]: "No man that wars entangles himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier."
5. And although it is just that those who serve the altar should also live from the altar, and the Synod likewise doth not oppose that priests should decently request that which is due unto them by legal title, it strictly forbids, however, that they raise the dues of the stole-fee (*prava epytrakhylia*) above that which is fair and customary, or cover their cupidity and most shameful trafficking in holy things under some outwardly fair title.
6. Let priests consider that unto them, as St. Ambrose saith, is entrusted the office of winning not money,

but souls [^226], and let them keep before their eyes the saying of the holy Apostle, admonishing: "And having food and raiment let us be therewith content" [^227]. Moreover, priests shall beware of all usury whatsoever, and shall not squander their own goods, and much less those of the church, on luxury in clothing for themselves or their family, and shall not contract debts which they would not be in a condition to repay to the injury of creditors.
7. As to virtues, first of all in regard of themselves, chastity is indispensable for priests, whether they be married, or widowers, or celibates; therefore the Synod admonishes those same priests that they arm themselves with temperance, fasting, and other pious works, as with weapons against the temptations of carnal lusts, following the example of the holy Apostle, who saith: "I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway" [^228]. Above all, let them avoid familiar cohabitation with strange women, which, as experience teaches, leads exceedingly unto corruption of morals, as everyone may learn from the admonition given unto Palladius the Bishop by St. Isidore of Pelusium: "Avoid the assemblies of women, O good man, as far as possible... but if any necessity compel thee to meet with them, keep thine eyes cast down unto the ground... and when thou hast briefly spoken that which may strengthen and enlighten their souls, flee immediately, lest perchance longer converse weaken and crush thy powers... but however that matter may be, have no relations with women, and then shalt thou gain honor among them... and if thou shouldst say unto me that thou dost frequently converse with them, and yet hast never suffered any harm therefrom, then indeed perhaps I might suffer myself to be persuaded, yet I would that all should believe it: they say that stones are softened by water, and a rock is hollowed out by incessantly falling drops [^229]. Frequent repetition overcomes nature. If therefore nature, which doth not willingly suffer itself to be removed, is removed and aban-

dons that which it ought least of all, by what manner of miracle then and means should the will, which is so easily moved, not be overcome and changed by habit?" [^230].
8. Unto celibate priests and widowers in particular the Synod enjoins that they endeavor to have for the management of the domestic household such a woman as shall either belong unto their near kin, or, if they cannot have such a one, a stranger indeed, but advanced in age and distinguished by honesty of morals. Likewise female servants, assistants of the same in labors, they shall accept who are equally pious and well-mannered, and they shall unceasingly watch over the preservation of their morality and piety, and those who are suspect and ill-conducted they shall immediately remove from their house.
9. In relations with others, a priest ought above all to preserve gentleness, especially toward his domestic household and parishioners; for frequent occasions present themselves for the exercise of that virtue, whether in bearing human faults, or in correcting their errors and subduing passions, not infrequently sharp and stubborn. A priest therefore ought to hold his heart as it were in his hands, that he may be able without anger, in a spirit of meekness, to deal with his neighbor. For gentleness not only makes us conformed unto God above other virtues [^231], but moreover contributes most of all unto the reconciliation of human hearts. From this, however, it doth not follow that punishment ought never to be employed, since Christ the Lord Himself also at times spoke more severely unto His disciples. But that fervor ought not to proceed from anger or from passion, but only from that love which enlightens and warms all, as St. Thomas saith: "To be angry according unto right reason is praiseworthy" [^232], and St. Gregory the Great: "Let there be love, but not enervating; let there be mercy, but not indulging more than is proper" [^233].
10. In regard of ecclesiastical superiors, the first duty of pastors as well as of other priests, which they have already promised at their ordination and assumption of their office, is true and sincere reverence and obedi-

ence unto them. And first of all they shall show the greatest reverence and obedience unto the Roman Pontiff, the Vicar of Christ upon earth and Head of the universal Church, praying for him, defending and vindicating His dignity, and receiving and observing the ordinances of the Apostolic See in humility. With that very same proportionate sentiment ought they to be animated toward their own Bishop, not forgetting the words of St. Cyprian: "A diocese is: a people united around its Priest, and a flock attached unto its Pastor; therefore thou oughtest to know that the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the Bishop, and if anyone be not with the Bishop, he is not in the Church." For the Bishop, as the Apostle saith, is placed by the Holy Spirit to govern the Church of God. Therefore according to the admonition of St. Jerome: "Fearing the Superior as the Lord, and loving him as a father." All priests shall avoid every manifestation of obstinacy, and in the first place they shall endeavor: 1) that all commands of the Bishop or his vicars be faithfully executed; 2) that for conscience' sake, both in private life and in the administration of their duties, they sincerely and completely observe diocesan regulations (laws), and especially statutes; 3) that they refrain from all judging of the acts and enactments of superiors; 4) that in all doubts or matters wherein they feel themselves aggrieved, they have recourse unto their Bishop with all filial confidence and submissiveness; 5) that they never urge, either by themselves or through others, that contrary to the sentence and decision of superiors they obtain any place or parish, or that of their own will, by unlawful steps, secret compacts, troubling the magnates, canvassed petitions, or other means of that sort incompatible with the holy canons, they procure success for themselves. We do by no means forbid, however, that difficulties and objections, if any exist according to circumstances, be set forth unto superiors according to the dictate of conscience; but where the reasons set forth have not been judged sufficient for departing from the decision, then assuredly the place of Holy Scripture shall be: "An obedient man shall speak being kept [unto victory]" [^234].

11. But whereas all authority is from God, priests shall show obedience and honor also unto the supreme Ruler, rendering unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and by prayers, especially public ones, and namely on his name day and birthday, together with the whole people commend His person unto God. Regional authorities, judges, magistrates, and leading inhabitants they shall endeavor to win over for themselves, that their own authority may be elevated by the authority of the same, at least lest by occasion of offense they create for themselves innumerable difficulties in parochial administrations. To enter into so great a familiarity, however, that it would appear as though one wished to please the prominent alone and seek after their favor, rejecting the lower and poor among one's parishioners, offends pastoral dignity and love, and can in no wise be free from danger.—If however perchance a priest cannot gain the goodwill of the hearts of the said superiors, he shall nevertheless so conduct himself toward them that it come not to open discord, and that he give them no occasion for just complaint, refraining also both privately and publicly from every offensive word. If ever conscience should compel him to answer them with the Apostles: "We cannot," let that be done without any arrogant pride, but with wisdom and moderation [^235].
12. Moreover, priests shall maintain mutual love and concord especially among themselves, mindful that the mark of the disciples of Christ is mutual love itself, as the Lord Himself on the Mystical Supper testifies with the words: "By this shall all men know that ye are My disciples, if ye have love one to another," which also He commanded three times in that same discourse, as if by a last testament, leaving unto them that His own and new commandment [^236]. They shall avoid all disputes, rivalries, and discords among themselves. In this matter they ought to pay no regard unto difference of rite, or diversity of nationality; for there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon

Him. Therefore, joined by a mutual and fraternal bond, Catholic priests of all rites shall have this one thing especially before their eyes: that, regardless of personal conveniences and private advantages, they become all things unto all men, that they may gain all for the Kingdom of God. Unto the awakening, fostering, and preserving of that peace and concord among priests, the concord and friendship of the Bishops of the diverse rites shall contribute most of all. Concerning this it behoves to make mention and declare unto all from time to time that the enemy man, that is, the devil, sows tares, excites and fosters discords, that through divided minds the power and success of the priestly ministry may be diminished; for where peace and love are, there the grace of the Holy Spirit abounds.—No less shall priests show love toward the faithful committed unto their care, who one day, at the coming of the Lord, shall be their crown of glory; for the commandment of love is infused by the Bishop into priests being ordained, as he clothes them in the phelonion (*felon*), saying: "Receive the priestly vestment, whereby love is understood; for God is able to increase love in thee and the perfect work."
13. Love however is twofold: namely, of God and of neighbor. Love of God shows itself especially in the love of souls; for unto no priest will Christ say: "Feed My sheep," save unto him who shall be able to affirm with Peter: "Thou knowest, Lord, that I love Thee." That love every priest ought to prove not in word and tongue only, but in deed and in truth. The zeal therefore of the house of God ought to consume the priest, and by reason of his office let him be wholly dedicated unto procuring the salvation of souls, not fainting under any burden, unterrified by any human considerations, prudent indeed and moderately wise, yet strong as death, and ready to give himself up for the salvation of souls. Whosoever therefore turns a sinner from the error of his iniquity, encourages the wavering and fainthearted, instructs and teaches the ignorant and doubting how they ought to walk in the way of the Lord, and directs other wanderers onto the right way, he shall render an acceptable service unto God and offer a sacrifice pleasing unto Him, and by that means through his solicitude and diligence shall attain that for which Christ offered Himself unto God the Father as a whole burnt offering.

14. Let us not ignore the greatness of the labor and the heaviness of the burden which very frequently are laid upon priests, especially pastors, for the purpose of removing abuses and restoring good morals among the people. For before all else it is necessary to contend against those who resist and defend unlawful customs long in use. For no one wishes to think ill of himself; not many recognize their own errors; what is more, they more frequently defend faults, and if anything better is proposed, they turn away from it, enticed by ancient custom. It is very difficult in such persons to destroy the body of sin, that they should no longer serve sin; nevertheless it is not impossible, for God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. And the vinedresser plants new vines, and prunes the old, digs about them, and adds fertilizer, that he may thereby bring it to pass that they yield more fruit. So also the Lord wills that we all apply diligence, and that nothing remain uncultivated in His vineyard.
15. But let that difficulty terrify no one; for He Himself shall assist Who saith: "I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee" [^237]; He will not suffer those labors to be in vain, for "He that ministers," as the Apostle saith, "seed to the sower both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness," and finally shall give unto us the reward of the labors of His saints [^238].
16. Furthermore, as to duties toward God, it behoves above all that the priest of God, if it can be, daily offer the sacrifice of the Divine Liturgy, having preceded the same with suitable preparation through canonical prayers and devout meditation, which shall last at least half an hour; for meditation, according to the words of St. Bernard: "Rules the affections, directs actions, corrects faults" [^239]; and St. Cyril of Alexandria, upon the words of the Psalm: "And in my meditation a fire shall flame out," saith: "Meditation is the flint whereby the fire of the Holy Spirit is struck within us"; and having added after the Divine Liturgy devout and fervent thanksgiving. Likewise through examination

of conscience they shall secure themselves daily, at least once in the day, when they are to go to sleep, which also the blessed John Chrysostom recommends and explains the profit thereof in his commentary upon the words of Psalm IV, v. 5: "The things ye say in your hearts, be sorry for them upon your beds." "After supper," he saith, "when ye go to sleep, when ye are to lie down, and when no one is present, there is great peace, and when no one hinders, there is deep silence: awaken the judgment of thy conscience, demand of it an examination, and if through the day thou hast conceived evil designs, or prepared snares, or deceived thy neighbor, or stirred up evil desires, when in the time of that silence thou shalt bring this before thyself and appoint conscience as judge over those dishonorable thoughts, pierce them and tear them and punish them, torment the thought that hath sinned."
17. Likewise daily shall he engage in spiritual reading, especially from Holy Scripture and the lives of the Saints, adhering in that matter unto the admonition of the said ecumenical Teacher St. John Chrysostom, affirming that such reading is indispensable for salvation, and that not only for men dedicated unto God, but also for those married and living in the world: "As unto a quiet haven—he saith—do we bring our soul by the reading of the Holy Scriptures. For a haven it is, untroubled by any waves, an unconquerable wall, an immovable tower, a glory that cannot be wrested away, an impenetrable armor, unconquerable peace of the soul, unceasing delight, every good that thou canst mention: such is the collection of the Divine Scripture. It both drives away sadness and guards peace of mind; it makes the poor richer, and procures security for the well-to-do and rich; it makes the sinner righteous, and protects the righteous with a safe covering; the evil that exists it uproots, and the good that is lacking it plants; it puts wickedness to flight, and not only leads unto virtue, but also strengthens it with roots and causes it to abide unceasingly; for it is a spiritual medicine and a kind of divine and unspeakable enchantment that destroys passions" [^240]. Likewise Homily III on Matthew and Homily III on Lazarus, where among other things he saith: "Concerning this do I ever admonish and shall not cease to admonish, that ye not

only attend here unto that which is spoken, but also, when ye shall be at home, unceasingly apply yourselves unto the reading of the Holy Scripture."
18. The visit of the Holy Mysteries the priest shall not omit on any day; his conscience he shall cleanse by frequent confession; and finally, at least for eight days in some retired place, every year, he shall give himself unto spiritual exercises [retreat]. In order that priests may be able to perform such exercises in a better manner, so far as may be, the Bishops shall endeavor that for participation in them there be found in the dioceses designated spiritual houses or monasteries where neighboring priests might assemble for retreats, and for that purpose they shall endeavor to appoint spiritual directors chosen by themselves. Until all this shall be arranged, the priests themselves, reflecting upon the brevity and fleeting nature of this life, and in spirit traversing the boundless expanse of eternity and the duration of eternal rewards, and hoping for the eternal salvation of themselves and their flock, shall of their own accord retire into some solitary place, if they have not at home a separate room, for the performance every year of spiritual exercises; choosing for that purpose such days in the year as shall be freer for them from the duties of their station and occupation.

### Chapter III: On the Learning of a Priest

CHAPTER III.
On the Learning of a Priest.

1. A priest, for the fulfillment of his office, ought to be provided as it were with two wings: with holiness of life and with sacred learning. Unto that explanation the sacred vestments of Aaron clearly lead, whereof some, as we have mentioned above, prefigure holiness of life, and some instruction in knowledge; and moreover the authority granted unto Aaron to teach Israel the commandments of the Lord and His laws. Therefore also through Malachi the Lord, calling the priest an Angel, that is, a messenger of God, adds: "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth:

for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts" [^241]. And in the New Testament the chosen vessel Paul admonishes Timothy with the words: "Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee" [^242].
2. But whereas among men there are found also worldly persons who combat true religion among the faithful with false reasoning, for this reason that same Apostle requires of the priest such learning, "that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers" [^243].
3. Therefore the Lord rejects from the priesthood those who neglect to acquire that learning, with the words: "Because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to Me" [^244].
4. Whereas however among books from which safe doctrine is drawn Holy Scripture occupies the first place as divinely inspired, and as the holy Fathers Augustine and Gregory the Great say, is as it were a letter sent from God unto men, and which St. Ambrose calls the priestly book [^245], and Origen: manna containing in itself all savor [^246], therefore it behoves the priest of God principally to apply himself unto the study of Holy Scripture, "that that heavenly treasure of sacred books, which the Holy Spirit with the greatest bounty hath given unto men, may not lie neglected" [^247]. In particular, let the priest be well-versed in the Four Gospels (Tetraevangelion), since especially from thence ought he to take the subject for holy sermons for the people.
5. But whereas Holy Scripture was translated from the Greek text into the Old Slavonic or sacred language, therefore in that tongue it behoves the priest to read the same, and unto that end he ought to acquire for himself adequate knowledge of the grammar of the church language, unto the study of which they ought already in the seminary to apply themselves. Unto that end they ought to procure for themselves also certain commentaries, even though shorter ones, such as: Massl, Allioli, Brentano, Serwatowski, Pelzel, and others. With the reading of Holy Scripture let them frequently interweave the reading of the lives of the Saints, which will supply very savory spiritual food both unto themselves and from their lips also unto the people committed unto their pastoral guidance.

The second place shall be occupied by Dogmatic and Moral Theology, the study of which is above all necessary for pastors, and of which latter the surest source are the works of St. Alphonsus Liguori, and as it were compendiums of the same, logically arranged, are the Morals of Gury and Müller. The third place shall be occupied by the Catechism published by authority of the Council of Trent, which, besides dogmatic doctrine, contains the fullest exposition of the whole Christian Catechism.—The fourth place shall be occupied by the study of Canon Law, collected in compendium, since our clergy is almost entirely dedicated unto the care of souls, so that without such learning, especially in matrimonial matters, a pastor could not duly execute his office.
6. But not the last place ought the science of Liturgics to occupy, combined with unceasing practice; and whereas it is closely bound up with dogmas, the priest ought diligently to investigate both the letter and the spirit of the rites, that from those treasures he may be able to set before the people in his instructions spiritual food. In that matter he ought not only to know the rites and ceremonies as they are set forth in the liturgical books, but also as they are used according to ancient lawful usage; and that uncertainty concerning them may be removed, priests shall observe and learn accurately above all that which this Synod, having already compiled and approved it, presents unto the whole clergy of this province for observance [^248].
7. In general, other branches of knowledge also, whether sacred or secular, which can be auxiliary unto supplementing priestly learning, ought not to be neglected.
8. The Synod fails not, however, to admonish priests here that, neglecting grave and pious reading, they squander not their time on the reading of harmful and empty novelties, and likewise that they read not periodicals which combat the authority of the Church, vex ecclesiastical superiors and their ordinances and statutes, and spit upon them with the spittle of an unclean heart.

9. Furthermore, for the progress of sacred learning and the perfection of the spirit, decanal conferences [synodules] as well as libraries can contribute very much. Therefore, as to decanal conferences, the Synod approves and for the future deems proper to retain and ever more to perfect the custom of holding such conferences at appointed times in individual deaneries, according to the rule submitted and approved by this Synod. As to libraries, the Synod commands that individual pastors endeavor to have at their church a small library, the books or works whereof must be entered in the church inventory. In this matter care must be taken that no one remove any book, for the purpose of taking it home to himself, without having deposited a receipt (*revers*), which is to be preserved in some secure place of the parish library itself. Besides such parish libraries, the Synod renews the enactments or circular regulations of the Ordinariates according to which in each deanery there shall be established in some more suitable place a decanal library for the convenience of the entire decanal clergy, and that under some competent curator or custodian, who should have care of the books distinctly and accurately described in a catalogue, and designate for those coming to the library a place for reading; and in case it should be necessary to lend any book from the same for home use, he shall permit this for an appointed time only, and that under security upon a receipt. For the augmentation of the library, endeavor shall be made to collect among fellow decanal priests, as members of the same, contributions wherewith new books may be purchased [^249].

### Chapter IV: On Parochial Competition

CHAPTER IV.
On Parochial Competition [*Concursus Parochialis*].

The governance of souls is the art of arts, the holiness corresponding unto this office so transcendent, that the Church to

...wards its administration hath always elevated not only learned and righteous priests, but also those distinguished above others among them in learning and holiness. And for the investigation of greater learning and righteousness, there are customarily employed, and that according unto the prescription of the Council of Trent, the so-called competitive parochial examinations [*concursus parochialis*], and besides that other measures whereby the holiness and aptitude of priests for designated parishes might be investigated more accurately. Desiring therefore to follow this prescription of the Ecumenical Council so far as the present circumstances of our Ruthenian Church permit, this Synod submits and for the entire province of Galicia approves the following rule for the obtaining of parochial benefices, which hath already been promulgated unto the archeparchial clergy by the pastoral letter of the Metropolitan Ordinariate of January 20, 1890, No. 1018 of 1889, which said pastoral letter the Synod deems profitable to cite again herein. Thus therefore begins the said pastoral letter:

  We [^250] . . . . .

## Titulus X. On Monks
### О Монахахъ

**1.** It is beyond dispute that the Monastic Orders are to be held in exceedingly high esteem, especially when it is known that the Church hath ever exalted them. Yet among the Monastic Orders, those are customarily to be regarded as most distinguished which unite the active life with the spiritual; since, gathering unto themselves an abundance of heavenly treasures, they pour them forth upon others.

Among such Orders, a most distinguished place is held by the Order of St. Basil the Great, so named after St. Basil the Great, in which the one and the other life are joined in an admirable union; from which have come forth the most glorious luminaries of learning and holiness unto the greatest profit of the Church and civil

society. But whereas in these latter times this Order had departed from its pristine luster, the untiringly solicitous Pope Leo XIII, by an issued Constitution beginning *“Singulare praesidium”* of May 12, 1882, recalled it unto pristine discipline, having employed thereto members of the Society of Jesus, whom St. Josaphat himself and Metropolitan Veliamyn Rutsky already in their own times experienced as the best helpers. That reform, happily begun, as we know, hath already brought forth rich fruits and gives certain hope that this renowned Order shall quickly revive.

Therefore this Synod admonishes the faithful that, if anyone feels himself called by the Lord unto this Order, they act with trust and readily obey the heavenly calling, knowing how many and how great evils in these times permeate civil society, so that in this manner also, through their salvific influence, society may be protected from corruption. And although this Order, by the aforesaid Constitution, is exempt from under the jurisdiction of the Ordinaries, yet for the sake of the very great benefits which can flow unto the Church from the mutual drawing together of the one and the other clergy, the Synod commends unto the Ordinaries that on their part they bestow upon this Order their benevolence and patronage, and unto the Superiors of Monasteries—that they show themselves willing to render spiritual assistance unto Bishops, granting permission unto their subjects to preach the word of God, and above all to hear the confessions of the junior clergy.

**2.** Finally, setting before the eyes of all the faithful of our rite the value of this reform, the Synod admonishes them in the Lord that, relying upon the singular foresight of the Supreme Pontiff Leo XIII, who happily holds the helm of the Universal Church, concerning our Church, they show themselves not only not opposed, but also favorably inclined toward the renewal of this glorious Order; and if they should ever hear that against this regulation of the Supreme Pastor certain faint-hearted or evilly-disposed persons dare to raise any reproaches, let them pay no heed unto them, but place their trust in the solicitude of their Bishops for the good of the Church and of our rite, and that the more so, as regarding their unceasing vigilance for the good of our Church,

rite, and faithful Ruthenian people, no reasonable doubt can be raised.

**3.** As to Nuns (*О Инокиняхъ*), their Monasteries, both according unto common law and our custom, are subject directly unto the jurisdiction of the Ordinaries. And that monastic discipline may ever more flourish in them, the Synod submits provisional rules, drafted for their testing and the approval of the Fathers constituting this Synod, which subsequently, after the conclusion of the Synod, the Most Reverend Metropolitan shall take care to print and put into practice. Moreover, for the easier and more successful preparation of candidates for the monastic life, this Synod decrees that a novitiate be established for them in the Slovita Monastery, and that for members of all dioceses, until in time the Bishops shall enact what is more suitable. But whereas the Slovita Monastery is endowed with too modest revenues, which can scarcely suffice for the maintenance of its own members, therefore by common agreement the Ordinaries shall endeavor to equalize the expenses of the monasteries of all dioceses so that the compensation may be equitable.

**4.** The Synod also wills that nuns engage in the education of girls, and so far as possible prepare their members for this work, with the exclusion of strangers, applying themselves only unto those subjects which correspond unto the calling of nuns. For the rest, as regards the preservation of monastic discipline, the Synod maintains what the Synod of Zamość wisely decreed, Titulus XII *On Nuns*, and hath decreed to modify this only: that by reason of changed circumstances of time, there shall not be required from candidates a dowry or tax of at least one thousand five hundred or three thousand gulden, but only whatever according unto the condition of the person and the judgment of the Ordinary [shall be determined].

**5.** As to the election of the Hegumena, until their number reaches ten professed or choir nuns, who alone have the right of voting in the election of the Hegumena, the Synod decrees that in the present state the common law be observed, and the Ordinary himself undertake the election of the Hegumena.

Furthermore, although endeavor must be made by all means that in such Monasteries of nuns monastic discipline may flourish above all things, nevertheless, to supplement the

deficiency of means, the Ordinaries shall endeavor for the present to support this rule by all means at hand, until in time, by the blessing of God, from Whom proceeds the beginning, middle, and end of good, the full completion of the work may be attained.

---

### Notes

[^152]: Synodical rubrical reform to the *Order of the Divine Liturgy* (Entrance Prayers) in the Lviv *Sluzhebnik* (Stauropegion Institute edition of 1866, p. 299). The Synod decrees that the older rubrics prescribing that the clergy physically step over to kiss each sovereign icon (*Таже отходятъ къ Иконѣ Христовѣ* — and *Таже цѣлуютъ Икону Богородицы*) are eliminated / discarded, standardizing the ceremony to reciting the troparia (*Пречистому Твоему образу* and *Милосердія сущи источникъ*) while standing before the Royal Doors with a sign of the cross and moderate bow to the knees.
[^141]: Pastoral Letter of the Greek Catholic Metropolitan Ordinariate of Lviv, September 3, 1889, No. 639; reproduced in Appendix XXXI (*Додатокъ ч. 31*) of the Synodal Acts. On December 8, 1870, Pope Pius IX had declared St. Joseph the Patron of the Universal Church (*Quemadmodum Deus*); this was further amplified by Pope Leo XIII in his encyclical *Quamquam pluries* (August 15, 1889). By this synodal decree, the Ruthenian Church formally and officially adopted St. Joseph, Spouse of the Most Pure Virgin Mary, as a special Patron of the Ruthenian Church.
[^142]: Appendix XXXII (*Додатокъ ч. 32*) of the Synodal Acts: Decree of the Sacred Congregation *de Propaganda Fide*, May 29, 1887, No. 5, published throughout the ecclesiastical province and specifically promulgated in the Archeparchy of Lviv on December 4, 1887, No. 358 ord., establishing canonical and artistic norms governing the design, erection, and veneration of public roadside crosses and outdoor crucifixes.
[^143]: Luke 2:41 — "Now His parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the Passover" (Septuagint / Vulgate: *Et ibant parentes ejus per omnes annos in Jerusalem in die solemni Paschae*). The Synod adduces the annual pilgrimage of the Holy Family to the Jerusalem Temple as the divine scriptural prototype for popular Christian pilgrimages to sanctuaries and shrines.
[^144]: Pastoral Letter of the Greek Catholic Metropolitan Ordinariate of Lviv, February 3, 1884, No. 35. The Synod strictly prohibits Catholic faithful from undertaking pilgrimages to non-Catholic or dissident shrines, specifically singling out the Pochaiv Lavra in Volhynia and Suceava in Bukovina. The historic Basilian monastery of the Dormition at Pochaiv had united with Rome at the 1720 Synod of Zamość and flourished as a Greek Catholic pilgrimage center until its forcible confiscation in 1831 by Tsar Nicholas I and transfer to the Russian Orthodox Church; Suceava, preserving the relics of the Great Martyr John the New of Suceava, likewise stood under non-Catholic ecclesiastical administration.
[^145]: St. Alphonsus Maria de Liguori, *Silva de materia praedicabili* (*Selva di materia predicabile*), Part III: *De exercitiis missionum* (On the Exercises of Popular Missions). St. Alphonsus forcefully defends the immense spiritual fruits of parish missions against skeptical critics, demonstrating that missions break down inveterate feuds, enforce financial and moral restitution, root out deep-seated vices, rectify sacrilegious and invalid confessions, and instill a lasting holy fear of sin.
[^146]: St. Gregory the Great (Pope Gregory I), *Homiliae in Evangelia* (Homilies on the Gospels): *"Virtus enim boni operis est perseverantia"* ("For the virtue of a good work is perseverance" / "virtue is constancy in the good"). The Synod invokes St. Gregory to remind pastors that pastoral campaigns against drunkenness and social vices require unflagging steadfastness.
[^147]: 1 Tim. 5:8 — "But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel" (*Аще кто о своихъ паче же о присныхъ не промышляетъ, вѣры отверглся есть, и невѣрнаго горшій есть* / *Si quis autem suorum, et maxime domesticorum, curam non habet, fidem negavit, et est infideli deterior*).
[^148]: 1 Tim. 3:4–5 — "One that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity; for if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?" (*Свой домъ добрѣ правящу, чада имущу въ послушаніи со всякою чистотою. Ащеже кто своего дому не умѣетъ правити, како о Церкви Божіей прилѣжати можетъ?* / *Qui domui suae bene praesit: filios habens subditos cum omni castitate. Si quis autem domui suae praeesse nescit, quomodo ecclesiae Dei diligentiam habebit?*).
[^149]: St. John Chrysostom, *Homily VI on Genesis* (*In Genesim Homilia VI*), no. 2 (PG 53, 56–57): "Make thy home a church: for thou art accountable for the salvation both of thy children and of thy servants; and even as an account of you will be demanded of us, so an account for thy servant, for thy wife, and for thy child will be demanded of each of you" (*Дôмъ твôй здѣлай церквою...*).
[^150]: St. Augustine of Hippo, *Tractates on the Gospel of John* (*In Joannis Evangelium Tractatus*), Tractate LI, no. 13 (PL 35, 1768), commenting on John 12:26 ("If any man serve Me, let him follow Me"). St. Augustine defines the Christian father's household governance as an ecclesiastical and quasi-episcopal ministry (*ecclesiasticum et quodammodo episcopale munus*), admonishing, instructing, and guiding every member of the domestic church toward eternal salvation.
[^151]: St. Gregory the Great (Pope Gregory I), *Regula Pastoralis* (*Pastoral Care*), Part II, Chapter 1: *"Tantum debet actionem populi actio transcendere praesulis, quantum distare solet a grege vita pastoris"* ("The conduct of the prelate ought so much to excel the conduct of the people as the life of the shepherd is wont to be distinguished from the flock").
[^153]: Pope Benedict XIV (Prospero Lambertini), *De Sacrosancto Sacrificio Missae*, Lib. I, cap. 9, no. 90 (or *Lectio* 90): citing the ancient Eastern liturgical custom whereby Maronites and Ambrosians place the amice (*humerale* / *amictus* / *наплещникъ*) over the alb/sticharion. This directly corresponds to the printed footnote `1) De sacrificio Missae Lect. 90.` at the bottom of Book p. 157 (Leaf p161).
[^154]: Pope Benedict XIV's *Euchologion sive Rituale Graecorum* (Rome, 1754): the exclusion of extracting separate particles on the diskos for the Honorable Cross and the Bodiless Powers (Angels). The Synod adduces this Roman edition of the Greek Euchologion and liturgical theology, explaining that particles extracted upon the diskos represent exclusively the threefold states of the Church—the Church Triumphant (the Saints), the Church Suffering (the souls in Purgatory), and the Church Militant (the living faithful)—whereas the Lamb alone represents Jesus Christ, the Head of the Church.
[^155]: The solemn canonization of Saint Josaphat Kuntsevych, OSBM, Archbishop of Polotsk and Hieromartyr of Vitebsk, proclaimed by Pope Pius IX on June 29, 1867, in the Vatican Basilica. By virtue of this universal canonization, the Synod decrees that in the Proskomide commemoration the title "blessed" (*блаженнаго*) is definitively replaced with "holy" (*святаго*), and introduces the commemoration of the Slavic Apostles Saints Cyril and Methodius immediately preceding him.
[^156]: The textual criticism of the Cherubic Hymn (*Херувимская пѣснь* / *Hymnus Cherubicus*). The Synod rejects the textual corruption introduced into the recent Benedictine Roman edition of the Euchologion (*Eὐχολόγιον τὸ μέγα*, Grottaferrata / Rome) which printed *"Яко Царя всѣхъ подъимемъ"* (*Ὡς τὸν βασιλέα τῶν ὅлων ὑпоδεξόμενοι* understood as future subjunctive "that we may receive"), affirming instead the authentic traditional Church Slavonic reading *"Яко Царя всѣхъ подъемлюще"* (present participle matching the Greek *ὑпоδεξόμενοι* / *doryphoroumenon* as "bearing up / receiving in triumph"), invisibly attended by the angelic ranks.
[^157]: Liturgical textual emendation in the Anaphora of the Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great. The Synod amends the obscure Slavonic rendering *"Путесотворивый воскресеніе"* translating the Greek clause *ὁδοποιήσας πάσῃ σаркὶ τὴν ἐк νεκрῶν ἀνάстаσιν* ("having paved the way for all flesh unto the resurrection from the dead"), clarifying that it must be translated and understood as *"Къ еже изъ мертвыхъ воскресенію"*.
[^158]: The Troparion of the Third Hour (*"O Lord, Who didst send down Thy All-Holy Spirit at the third hour upon Thine Apostles..."*) inserted into the Epiklesis of the Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and St. Basil the Great. Although critical liturgical scholars and certain Roman editions noted that this troparion was an interpolated medieval Slavic and post-Byzantine addition not found in the ancient uncial Greek euchologia (such as the 8th-century Barberini Greek 336), the Fathers of the 1891 Lviv Synod expressly resolved to omit any reformatory marginal note and maintain the unbroken Ruthenian liturgical praxis and received rubrics of the printed Liturgicons.
[^159]: Church Slavonic philological and grammatical emendation in the diptychs following the Megalynarion (*"Especially for our all-holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady Theotokos..."*). The Synod corrects the erroneous genitive singular *"Святаго Іоанна"* in late editions, restoring the precise Slavonic locative case *"О святѣмъ Іоаннѣ"* for the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom (corresponding to Greek *ὑπέρ* with genitive, rendered by Slavonic *o* with locative, Latin *pro*) and the instrumental case *"Съ святымъ Іоанномъ"* for the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great (corresponding to Greek *μετά* with genitive, rendered by Slavonic *съ* with instrumental, Latin *cum*), while mandating the archaic locative adjective ending *-ѣ* rather than *-ой* (*"О Пресвятѣй"*).
[^160]: Synodical liturgical appendix reference: *On the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, see Appendix 33; likewise the Slavonic text of the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and St. Basil the Great among the Ruthenian appendices 33a and 33b* (*О Литургіи Преждеосвященыхъ зри въ додатку 33, такожь текстъ славяньскій Литургіи св. Іоанна Златоуст. и св. Василія Вел. мѣжь додатками рускими 33, а. и 33, б.*). This directly corresponds to printed footnote `1)` at the bottom of Book p. 182 (Leaf p186), concluding Titulus V (*On the Holy Liturgy*).
[^161]: II Paralipomenon (II Chronicles) 6:18 (Septuagint versification: *ІІ. Параліп. VI. 18*): "If heaven and the heaven of heavens suffice not God, how much less this house which I have built!" Cited at the opening of Titulus VI, *On Churches Dedicated unto the Divine Service* (*О храмахъ посвященыхъ Службѣ Божôй*), Book p. 182 (Leaf p186).
[^162]: Prophecy of Haggai (Aggeus) 2:9–10 (LXX: Haggai 2:10; printed as *Гл. II., 10*): "Great shall be the glory of this last house more than of the first, saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace..." Book p. 183 (Leaf p187).
[^163]: Malachi 1:11 (*Малах. I., 11*): "For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down, My name hath been glorified among the Gentiles; and in every place incense is offered unto My name, and a pure offering." Book p. 183 (Leaf p187).
[^164]: Genesis 28:12–13 (*Быт. 28. 12. 13*): Jacob's vision of the heavenly ladder and the Lord standing above it at Bethel: "How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven." Book p. 183 (Leaf p187).
[^165]: St. John of Damascus, *De Fide Orthodoxa* (*An Exact Exposition of the Orthodox Faith*), Book IV, Chapter 12 (*Concerning Worship toward the East* / *О вѣрѣ правосл. книг. 4. гл. 12* / PG 94, 1157–1162): demonstrating the Apostolic antiquity and theological symbolism of praying toward the east, facing Christ the spiritual Sun of Righteousness and the ancient Paradise planted in the east. Book p. 184 (Leaf p188).
[^166]: Synod of Zamość (1720), Titulus *On Churches* (*De ecclesiis*), and in the Inquiries for Canonical Visitations; likewise the decrees and canons of the Greek-Melkite (Maronite) Synod of Mount Lebanon (1736), Part IV, Chapter I, in *Collectio Lacensis* (*Acta et Decreta Sacrorum Conciliorum Recentiorum*, Friburgi Brisgoviae, Tom. II): prescribing the retention of the holy water vessel at church entrances for the faithful to sign themselves upon entry. Book p. 186 (Leaf p190).
[^167]: Synod of Zamość (1720), Titulus III, *On the Sacraments and Their Administration*, § 4, *On the Celebration of the Liturgy and Inquiries concerning the Most Holy Eucharist* (*Тит: III. О Тайнахъ и ихъ строеню § 4. О служеню Литургіи и вопр. о Найсвятѣйшой Євхаристіи*): regulating the consecration, gilding, maintenance, and reverence due unto sacred vessels and liturgical linen. Book p. 187 (Leaf p191).
[^168]: Song of Songs (Canticle of Canticles) 6:4, 10 (LXX: Canticle 6:3, 9; printed as *Пѣснь пѣсней 6. 3. 9.*): "Who is she that comes forth as the morning rising, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, terrible as an army set in array?" (*ужасъ яко вчиненны* / *terribilis ut castrorum acies ordinata*). Opening of Titulus VII, *On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy* (*О Іерархіи церковнôй*), Book p. 189 (Leaf p193).
[^169]: Hebrews 4:9 (*Євр. 4. 9.*): "There remains therefore a sabbath rest for the people of God." Book p. 189 (Leaf p193).
[^170]: Hebrews 10:20 (*Євр. 10. 20.*): "By a new and living way, which He hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, His flesh." Book p. 189 (Leaf p193).
[^171]: Hebrews 7:25 (and Hebrews 6:20 / 7:24; printed as *Євр. 7. 25.*): Christ the High Priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek, ever living to make intercession for us before the Father. Book p. 189 (Leaf p193).
[^172]: St. Leo the Great (Pope Leo I), *Epistola 84* (to Anastasius, Bishop of Thessalonica), Chapter 11 (PL 54, 920): *"De qua forma episcoporum quoque est orta distinctio, et magna ordinatione provisum est, ne omnes sibi omnia vindicarent, sed essent in singulis provinciis singuli, quorum inter fratres haberetur prima sententia..."* Book p. 190 (Leaf p194).
[^173]: Matthew 28:18 (*Мат. 28. 18.*): "All power is given unto Me in heaven and in earth." Book p. 190 (Leaf p194).
[^174]: Matthew 28:20 (*Мат. 28, 20.*): "Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Amen." Book p. 190 (Leaf p194).
[^175]: Luke 10:16 (*Лук. 10. 16.*): "He that heareth you heareth Me; and he that despiseth you despiseth Me; and he that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me." Book p. 190 (Leaf p194).
[^176]: Appendix III, 1. b: The historic Pastoral Letter of Cardinal Mykhailo Levytsky, Metropolitan of Halych, Archbishop of Lviv, dated March 10, 1841 (*Пастырское посланіє бл. п. Его Еминенціи кардинала Михаила Левицкого, Митрополита Галицкого, зъ дня 10. марта 1841*), compiling patristic and liturgical testimonies from the Ruthenian Sluzhebniks and Trebniks regarding the universal primacy of the Roman See. Book p. 191 (Leaf p195).
[^177]: Fourth Lateran Council (1215) under Pope Innocent III, Constitution V (*De dignitate patriarcharum* / *Antiqua concilia* / *Antiqua patriarchalium sedium privilegia renovantes*), incorporated into the *Decretals of Gregory IX* (Corpus Juris Canonici, Lib. I, tit. 33, cap. 23) and cited by Pope Benedict XI: affirming the traditional order of the four patriarchal sees after Rome (Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem) derived from and dependent upon the Roman primacy. Book p. 192 (Leaf p196).
[^178]: Anthony Petrushevych (*Антоній Петрушевичъ*), Galician-Ruthenian historian and canon: his critical historical monograph (*Историческое изслѣдованіе*) dates the signing or promulgation of Pope Pius VII's Bull *In universalis Ecclesiae regimine* as April 15, 1807, rather than February 22. Book p. 193 (Leaf p197).
[^179]: Papal Apostolic Brief / Constitution of Pope Clement VIII, *Decet Romanum Pontificem*, dated 7 Kalends of March 1595/1596 (February 23, 1596, more romano 1595): ratifying the Union of Brest and confirming unto the Ruthenian Metropolitan of Kyiv the traditional patriarchal right to confirm, institute, and consecrate the suffragan bishops of his province. Book p. 193 (Leaf p197).
[^180]: Papal Bull of Pope Pius VII, *In universalis Ecclesiae regimine*, dated February 22, 1807: canonically restoring the ancient Ruthenian Metropolitan See of Halych and uniting it in perpetuity with the Archeparchy of Lviv, confirming the Metropolitan's jurisdiction over the Eparchies of Peremyshl and Kholm. Book p. 194 (Leaf p198).
[^181]: Ezekiel 34:4 (*Іезек. 34. 4.*): The pastoral mandate and divine judgment against neglectful shepherds: "The weak have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them." Book p. 195 (Leaf p199).
[^182]: Apocalypse (Book of Revelation) chapters 2 and 3: the divine epistles and solemn warnings sent by Christ through St. John unto the Angels (Bishops) of the seven Churches of Asia. The printed text reads `Апок. III и IV.` (*Апок. II и III* intended, as chapters 2–3 contain the seven messages unto the Angels of the Churches). Book p. 195 (Leaf p199).
[^183]: Decrees of the 1891 Lviv Provincial Synod, Titulus VII, Chapter IV, *On Cathedral and Collegiate Chapters* (*Глава IV. О Капитулахъ*), infra: regulating the election and powers of the two Vicars (Capitular / Administrator and Temporalities) upon the vacancy of the episcopal see. Book p. 196 (Leaf p200).
[^184]: Appendix XXXIV (*Додатокъ ч. 34*) of the Synodal Acts: Official Statutes of the Metropolitan Cathedral Chapter of Lviv (*Statuta Capituli Metropolitani Leopolensis*), approved by the Sacred Congregation *de Propaganda Fide pro negotiis Ritus Orientalis* on September 4, 1875, signed by Cardinal Alessandro Franchi, Prefect, and Archbishop Gaetano Aloisi Masella, Secretary. Book p. 198 (Leaf p202).
[^185]: Printed marginal note: *Which indeed was already accomplished in the year 1894* (*Що и стало ся вже р. 1894*). By formal decree of the Sacred Congregation *de Propaganda Fide* in 1894, the Statutes of the Greek Catholic Cathedral Chapter of Peremyshl were submitted and canonically confirmed. Book p. 199 (Leaf p203).
[^186]: Printed marginal note: *This also was already accomplished in 1894. The statutes of both episcopal Chapters have been confirmed* (*Се такожь вже стало ся 1894 р. Статуты обохъ еписк. Капитулъ подтвердженô*), referring to the Holy See's confirmation of the statutes of the Cathedral Chapters of Peremyshl and Stanyslaviv. Book p. 199 (Leaf p203).
[^187]: Printed cross-reference: *See the statutes of the Chapter of the Metropolitan Church of Lviv, Appendix 34* (*зри статуты Капитулы Церкви Митроп Львôвскои Додат. 34*). Book p. 199 (Leaf p203).
[^188]: Luke 12:48 — "For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more" (*Ємуже будетъ дано много, много взыщется отъ него* / *Omni autem cui multum datum est, multum quaeretur ab eo*). Book p. 199 (Leaf p203).
[^189]: 1 Timothy 5:18 — "The laborer is worthy of his reward" (*Достоинъ дѣлатель мзды своея* / *Dignus est operarius mercede sua*), citing the Pauline apostolic principle of pastoral justice and material support for clergy. Book p. 200 (Leaf p204).
[^190]: Acts of the Apostles 1:1 — "The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach" (*Первое убо слово сотворихъ о всѣхъ, о Ѳеофиле, яже начатъ Іисусъ творити же и учити* / *Primum quidem sermonem feci de omnibus, o Theophile, quae coepit Jesus facere et docere*). Book p. 202 (Leaf p206).
[^191]: 2 Timothy 4:2 — "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine" (*Проповѣдуй слово, насто́й благовременнѣ и безвременнѣ, обличи, запрети, умоли со всякимъ долготерпѣніемъ и ученіемъ* / *Praedica verbum, insta opportune, importune: argue, obsecra, increpa in omni patientia, et doctrina*). Book p. 203 (Leaf p207).
[^192]: Apocalypse (Book of Revelation) 2:14–16 — The solemn divine warning and judgment addressed unto the Angel (Bishop) of the Church in Pergamum against tolerating the doctrine of Balaam, stumbling blocks, and the deeds of the Nicolaitans. Book p. 204 (Leaf p208).
[^193]: Ruthenian Provincial Synod of Zamość (1720), Titulus X *De parochis* (On Pastors), obliging every pastor to maintain four distinct parish registers (*чотыри книги* / *quatuor libri parochiales*): the register of baptisms (*Liber Baptizatorum*), confirmations (*Liber Confirmatorum*), marriages (*Liber Copulatorum*), and the deceased (*Liber Mortuorum*). Book p. 205 (Leaf p209).
[^194]: Luke 5:5 — "Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at Thy word I will let down the net" (*Наставниче, об нощь всю труждьшеся, ничесоже яхомъ: по глаголу же Твоему ввергу мрежу* / *Praeceptor, per totam noctem laborantes, nihil cepimus: in verbo autem tuo laxabo rete*). Book p. 205 (Leaf p209).
[^195]: Provincial Council of Prague (1860), Titulus VI, Chapter 8 *On Parochial Vicars and Assistants* (*De vicariis et cooperatoribus*), prescribing filial obedience, sincere cooperation, and mutual harmony between parochial assistants / curates and parish pastors. Book p. 207 (Leaf p211).
[^196]: Pope Pius IX, Apostolic Letter *Caelestium munerum dispensatio* (July 1, 1873), establishing the Pontifical Seminary of Pius IV (Seminario Pio) in Rome for the ascetical, theological, and disciplinary formation of candidates for the sacred priesthood. Book p. 208 (Leaf p212).
[^197]: Proverbs 22:15 (Septuagint versification: *Притч. 22:15 LXX*): "There are ways before a man, and he loves not to turn away from them; but foolishness is tied to the heart of a youth, and the rod of correction shall drive it far from him" (*Суть путіе предъ мужемъ, и не любитъ возвратити ся отъ нихъ*). Book p. 209 (Leaf p213).
[^198]: Proverbs 22:6 (Vulgate: *Proverbia 22:6*): "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it" (*Adolescens juxta viam suam etiam cum senuerit non recedet ab ea*). Book p. 209 (Leaf p213).
[^199]: Third Plenary Council of Baltimore (1884), Titulus V *De clericorum educatione et instructione*, Caput I *De seminariis minoribus* (nos. 139–152), enacting canonical norms requiring seminary superiors and professors to be distinguished by mature piety, exemplary morals, prudence, and sacred learning. Book p. 210 (Leaf p214).
[^200]: Wisdom of Solomon 6:19 (Septuagint versification: Wisdom 6:19 LXX; Wisdom 6:18 MT/Vulgate): "And the care of discipline is love; and love is the keeping of her laws; and the giving heed unto her laws is the assurance of incorruption" (*Попеченіе же о наказаніи любы, любы же сохраненіе законовъ ея* / *Cura ergo disciplinae dilectio est: et dilectio custodia legum illius est*). Book p. 210 (Leaf p214).
[^201]: Comparative conciliar legislation: Provincial Council of Cologne (1860), Titulus IV *De Seminariis*; Provincial Council of Tours (1856); and Third Plenary Council of Baltimore (1884), Titulus V: emphasizing constant vigilance over student morals, Christian civility, and academic progress. Book p. 211 (Leaf p215).
[^202]: Ibid., Provincial Councils of Cologne, Tours, and Baltimore: decreeing the timely expulsion of incorrigible seminarians exhibiting obstinacy, contempt for discipline, or moral scandal. Book p. 211 (Leaf p215).
[^203]: Third Plenary Council of Baltimore (1884), Titulus V, Caput II *De seminariis majoribus*, no. 156: prohibiting seminary rectors and resident superiors from accepting extraneous ecclesiastical or civil duties that divide their attention from the governance of the seminary. Book p. 212 (Leaf p216).
[^204]: Appendix XXXV (*Додатокъ ч. 35*) of the Synodal Acts: General Statutes and Rules of the Greek Catholic Seminary (*Statuta et Regulae Seminarii Generalis Leopolensis*), approved and confirmed by the Synod of 1891. Book p. 215 (Leaf p219).
[^205]: Hebrews 5:4 — "And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (*И никтоже самъ себѣ пріемлетъ честь, но званный отъ Бога, якоже и Ааронъ* / *Nec quisquam sumit sibi honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo, tamquam Aaron*). Book p. 215 (Leaf p219).
[^206]: 1 Corinthians 7:32–33 — "He that is unmarried cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is married cares for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife" (*Не оженивыйся печется о Господнихъ, како угодити Господеви: а оженивыйся печется о мірскихъ, како угодити женѣ. Раздѣлися жена и дѣва* / *Qui sine uxore est, sollicitus est quae Domini sunt, quomodo placeat Deo. Qui autem cum uxore est, sollicitus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat uxori: et divisus est*). Book p. 216 (Leaf p220).
[^207]: St. Bernard of Clairvaux, *Sermo in Nativitate B.V. Mariae de Aquaeductu* (Homily on the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, "On the Aqueduct"), no. 3: "Totum nos habere voluit per Mariam" ("He willed that we should have all things through Mary"). Book p. 217 (Leaf p221).
[^208]: St. Thomas Aquinas, *Expositio Salutationis Angelicae* (Opusculum 8), a. 1: "Tantum habet de gratia, quod sufficit ad salutem totius mundi" ("She hath so much of grace that it suffices unto the salvation of the whole world"). Book p. 217 (Leaf p221).
[^209]: St. Augustine, *Enarrationes in Psalmos*, Ps. 118 [Ps. 119 MT], Sermo 9. Book p. 219 (Leaf p223).
[^210]: Pope St. Gregory the Great, *Registrum Epistolarum*, Book I, Epist. 24: on the sublime pastoral responsibility and dignity of the sacred priesthood. Book p. 219 (Leaf p223).
[^211]: Wisdom of Sirach (Ecclesiasticus) 45:7, 8, 17, 20, 21 (Septuagint versification: *Сір. 45:7–21 LXX*): the glorification, sacred vestments, and perpetual priesthood of Aaron. Book p. 219 (Leaf p223).
[^212]: Wisdom of Sirach 45:17 [cited according to the verse divisions of Codex Vaticanus as v. 70]: "He gave unto him His commandments, and authority in the covenants of judgments, to teach Jacob the testimonies, and to enlighten Israel in His law." Book p. 219 (Leaf p223).
[^213]: St. John Chrysostom, *Homily 10 on the Epistle to the Hebrews*, no. 3 (PG 63:83–90): on the bloodless Sacrifice of the New Covenant and the Holy Spirit descending to consecrate the Holy Gifts upon the altar. Book p. 219 (Leaf p223).
[^214]: Malachi 1:10–11: "I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same My name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto My name, and a pure offering: for My name shall be great among the heathen, saith the Lord of hosts." Book p. 219 (Leaf p223).
[^215]: St. Augustine, *Sermo de Verbis Evangelii*, citing the patristic exclamation on the priestly dignity: "O veneranda sacerdotum dignitas, in quorum manibus Dei Filius velut in utero Virginis incarnatur!" and *Enarratio in Psalmum 26 [Ps. 27 MT]*: "O veneranda sanctitas manuum! O felix exercitium! Qui creavit me, dedit mihi creare se; et qui creavit me sine me, creat se per me." Book p. 220 (Leaf p224).
[^216]: In St. Alphonsus Maria de Liguori, *Selva di materia predicabile per gli esercizi agli ecclesiastici* (The Forest of Preachable Material for Clergy Retreats), Part I, cap. 1, no. 15, citing St. Augustine (*Tractatus in Joannem* 72): "Majus est opus ex impio justum facere, quam creare caelum et terram" ("It is a greater work to make a righteous man out of an ungodly man than to create heaven and earth"). Book p. 220 (Leaf p224).
[^217]: Jan Ignacy Kulczyński, O.S.B.M., *Specimen Ecclesiae Ruthenicae*, Nazianz Msc. Exercit. p. 210: citing the address of Cyril III, Metropolitan of Kyiv (1243–1280), at his Council (Synod of Kyiv, 1273/1274), calling priests "earthly angels and heavenly men" who stand with the Cherubim and Seraphim, summon the Holy Spirit, transform the bread and wine, and bind and loose upon earth and in heaven. Book p. 220 (Leaf p224).
[^218]: St. Augustine, *Enarrationes in Psalmos*, Ps. 29 [Ps. 30 MT], and Isaiah 61:10 [printed cited as Isa. 40:10]: on the bridal and priestly vesture of Christ and the Church. Book p. 221 (Leaf p225).
[^219]: Isaiah 61:10 (Septuagint versification according to Codex Vaticanus: *Ис. 61:10 LXX*): "Let my soul rejoice in the Lord: for He hath clothed me with the garment of salvation, and the robe of gladness; as a bridegroom He hath put a crown on me, and as a bride He hath adorned me with ornaments." Prescribed in the Ruthenian *Sluzhebnik* at the vesting of the priest with the sticharion (*stikhar*). Book p. 221 (Leaf p225).
[^220]: St. Thomas Aquinas, *Summa Theologiae*, I-II, q. 102, a. 5, ad 10 in fine: the allegorical and moral exposition of the eight vestments of the High Priest Aaron (the linen breeches for chastity, linen tunic for purity, girdle for moderation, mitre/tiara for rectitude of intention, golden plate on the forehead for continual remembrance of God, ephod for bearing the infirmities of the people, breastplate for fervent pastoral love, hyacinth-blue tunic for heavenly conversation, golden bells for divine doctrine, and pomegranates for unity of faith and concord in morals). Book p. 221 (Leaf p225).
[^221]: St. Jerome, *Epistola 64 (ad Fabiolam)* [printed cited as Epist. 128], no. 19: on the mystical signification of the priestly vestments, requiring that the doctrine, demeanor, gestures, and deeds of the High Priest be a perpetual sermon to the people. Book p. 222 (Leaf p226).
[^222]: Pope St. Leo the Great, *Epistola 4 (ad Episcopos per Campaniam)*; codified in Gratian's *Decretum*, Distinctio 32, c. 1 *Omnium*: "Quod enim in aliis fidelibus liberum est a culpa, in his tamen illicitum judicatur" ("For that which in other faithful is free from blame, in them is nevertheless judged unlawful"). Book p. 222 (Leaf p226).
[^223]: Council of Trent, Session XXII (September 17, 1562), *Decretum de Reformatione*, Chapter 1: "Nihil est quod alios magis ad pietatem et Dei cultum assidue instruat, quam eorum vita et exemplum, qui se divino ministerio dedicarunt" ("There is nothing that doth more continually instruct others unto piety and the worship of God than the life and example of those who have dedicated themselves unto the divine ministry"). Book p. 222 (Leaf p226).
[^224]: 1 Timothy 3:5: "For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?" (*Аще кто своего дому не умѣетъ правити, како о церкви Божіей прилѣжати возможетъ?* / *Si quis autem domui suae praeesse nescit, quomodo ecclesiae Dei diligentiam habebit?*). Book p. 224 (Leaf p228).
[^225]: 2 Timothy 2:4: "No man that wars entangles himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier" (*Никтоже бо, воинъ бывая, обязуется куплями житейскими, да воєводѣ угоденъ будетъ* / *Nemo militans Deo implicat se negotiis saecularibus: ut ei placeat, cui se probavit*). Book p. 225 (Leaf p229).
[^226]: St. Ambrose of Milan, *Expositio Evangelii secundum Lucam*, Lib. I (on Luke 1 / Isaiah 1): reminding priests that their commission from Christ is to seek and win souls, not earthly gain. Book p. 226 (Leaf p230).
[^227]: 1 Timothy 6:8: "And having food and raiment let us be therewith content" (*Имѣюще же пищу и одѣяніе, сими довольни будемъ* / *Habentes autem alimenta, et quibus tegamur, his contenti simus*). Book p. 226 (Leaf p230).
[^228]: 1 Corinthians 9:27: "But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway" (*Но умерщвляю тѣло моє и порабощаю, да не како, инымъ проповѣдуя, самъ неключимъ буду* / *Sed castigo corpus meum, et in servitudinem redigo: ne forte cum aliis praedicaverim, ipse reprobus efficiar*). Book p. 226 (Leaf p230).
[^229]: Job 14:19 (Septuagint versification: *Іов. 14:19 LXX*): "The waters wear the stones; and thou washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth" (*Каменія изгладиша воды, и потопиша воды возвишенія персти земныя* / *Lapides excavant aquae, et alluvione paulatim terra consumitur*), cited in the warning of St. Isidore of Pelusium to Bishop Palladius. Book p. 226 (Leaf p230).
[^230]: St. Isidore of Pelusium, *Epistolae*, Book II, Epist. 284 (ad Palladium Episcopum): warning on the perilous snare of familiarity and frequent conversation with women, and how continuous custom wears down even rock and stubborn human nature. Book p. 227 (Leaf p231).
[^231]: St. John Chrysostom, *Homily 19 on the Epistle to the Romans*, no. 4: on meekness, patience, and gentle charity as the supreme virtue conforming the Christian minister to God. Book p. 227 (Leaf p231).
[^232]: St. Thomas Aquinas, *Summa Theologiae*, II-II, q. 158, a. 1, ad 3: "Irasci secundum rationem rectam laudabile est" ("To be angry according unto right reason is praiseworthy"). Book p. 227 (Leaf p231).
[^233]: Pope St. Gregory the Great, *Moralia in Job*, Book XX, cap. 8: "Sit amor, sed non emolliens; sit rigor, sed non exasperans; sit zelus, sed non immoderate saeviens; sit pietas, sed non plus quam expedit indulgens" ("Let there be love, but not enervating; let there be mercy, but not indulging more than is expedient"). Book p. 227 (Leaf p231).
[^234]: Proverbs 21:28 (Septuagint: *Притч. 21:28 LXX*): "A false witness shall perish: but an obedient man shall speak being kept [unto victory]" (*Мужъ послушливъ сохраняемъ возглаголетъ* / *Vir obediens loquetur victorias*); citing the diocesan pastoral constitution: *Instructio Pastoralis Eystettensis* (Pastoral Instruction of the Bishop of Eichstätt), Titulus XIII, cap. 1, §§ 6 *De Obedientia et reverentia erga Superiores*. Book p. 228 (Leaf p232).
[^235]: *Instructio Pastoralis Eystettensis*, Titulus XIV, cap. II, § 8: on respectful and prudent relations with civil authorities and magistrates, maintaining pastoral independence with Christian modesty when conscience demands declaring with the Apostles "We cannot" (Acts 4:20). Book p. 229 (Leaf p233).
[^236]: John 13:35 [printed citation: *Іоан. 16, 35*]: "By this shall all men know that ye are My disciples, if ye have love one to another" (*По семъ познаютъ вси, яко мои ученици єсте, аще любовь имате между собою* / *In hoc cognoscent omnes quia mei discipuli estis, si dilectionem habueritis ad invicem*). Book p. 229 (Leaf p233).
[^237]: 2 Corinthians 6:2; Isaiah 49:8: "For He saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee: behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation." Book p. 231 (Leaf p235).
[^238]: 2 Corinthians 9:10: "Now He that ministers seed to the sower both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness"; cited in *Instructio Pastoralis Eystettensis*, Titulus XIII, cap. 7, § 1. Book p. 231 (Leaf p235).
[^239]: St. Bernard of Clairvaux, *De Consideratione ad Eugenium Papam*, Book I, cap. 7: "Consideratio regit affectus, dirigit actus, corrigit excessus, componit mores, vitam honestat et ordinat" ("Meditation / consideration rules the affections, directs actions, corrects excesses, composes morals, and orders life"). Book p. 231 (Leaf p235).
[^240]: St. John Chrysostom, *Homilia in Psalmum 48 [Ps. 47 LXX]*, no. 1; *Homily 3 on the Gospel of Matthew*, and *Homily 3 on Lazarus and the Rich Man*: on the absolute necessity of daily spiritual reading of Holy Scripture for salvation, both for clergy and laity living in the world. Book p. 232 (Leaf p236).
[^241]: Malachi 2:7 [printed citation: *Гл. I. 7.*]: "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts" (*Понеже устнѣ ієреовѣ сохранятъ разумъ, и закона взыщутъ отъ устъ єго, яко Ангелъ Господа Вседержителя єсть* / *Labia enim sacerdotis custodient scientiam, et legem requirent ex ore ejus: quia angelus Domini exercituum est*). Book p. 234 (Leaf p238).
[^242]: 1 Timothy 4:15–16: "Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all. Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee" (*Внимай себѣ и ученію: и пребывай въ нихъ: сія бо творя и самъ спасешися и послушающія тебе* / *Attende tibi, et doctrinae: insta in illis. Hoc enim faciens, et teipsum salvum facies, et eos qui te audiunt*). Book p. 234 (Leaf p238).
[^243]: Titus 1:9: "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers" (*Да силенъ будетъ и утѣшати въ здравѣмъ ученіи и противящіяся обличати* / *Ut potens sit exhortari in doctrina sana, et eos qui contradicunt, arguere*). Book p. 234 (Leaf p238).
[^244]: Hosea 4:6: "Because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to Me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children" (*Яко ты умнѣніе отверглъ єси, отвергу и азъ тебе, еже не жречествовати мнѣ* / *Quia tu scientiam repulisti, repellam te, ne sacerdotio fungaris mihi*). Book p. 234 (Leaf p238).
[^245]: St. Ambrose of Milan, *De Fide ad Gratianum Augustum*, Lib. III: calling Holy Scripture the priestly book par excellence. Book p. 234 (Leaf p238).
[^246]: Origen, *Homilia 7 in Exodum*: comparing Holy Scripture unto the celestial manna containing in itself all heavenly savor and sweetness. Book p. 234 (Leaf p238).
[^247]: Council of Trent, Session V (June 17, 1546), *Decretum secundum: Super lectione et praedicatione*, cap. 1: commanding the study and lecturing on Holy Scripture so that the celestial treasure of the sacred books may not lie neglected. Book p. 234 (Leaf p238).
[^248]: Appendix XXXVI (*Додатокъ ч. 36*) of the Synodal Acts: Official Directory and Ceremonial Rubrics of the Greek Catholic Church in Galicia (*Ordo celebrationis officiorum divinorum et caeremoniarum*), compiled and approved by the Provincial Synod of 1891. Book p. 235 (Leaf p239).
[^249]: Historical pastoral legislation on decanal and parish libraries in Galicia: Pastoral Letter of Cardinal Mykhailo Levytsky, Metropolitan of Lviv, dated May 4, 1826, No. 1995; and Circular Ordinance of the Greek Catholic Metropolitan Consistory of Lviv, dated January 20, 1876, No. 273. Book p. 236 (Leaf p240).
[^250]: Appendix XXXVII (*Додатокъ ч. 37*) of the Synodal Acts: Pastoral Letter of the Greek Catholic Metropolitan Consistory of Lviv to the Archeparchial Clergy regarding the Rules for Parochial Competition (*Concursus*), dated January 20, 1890, No. 1018/1889. Book p. 237 (Leaf p241).