# Acts and Decrees of the Ruthenian Provincial Synod of Lviv (1891)
## Raw Draft Translation — Cohort 11: Physical Pages 161–180 (Leaves p161–p180 / Book pp. 157–176)

=== LEAF p161 ===
*(Physical Page 161 / Book Page 157)*

in our Sluzhebniks it is not found, the priest omits it. *After this, having made a great prostration, they descend from the steps, and having bowed once more before the Holy Table, they depart unto the Prothesis [Table of Oblation].*

Next, as in the Slavonic Sluzhebnik, page 300 (2):  
*"Then the deacon takes a blessing, etc."*:  
"Bless, Master," etc., page 300 (2).  
"Blessed is God," etc., page 300 (2).  
*"After this they wash, etc."*, page 300 (2), Goar 57.  
"I will wash [my hands] among the innocent," etc., Goar 57.  
The words in the rubric: *"both saying one after the other"* are not needed, but shall be omitted, for each, the priest as well as the deacons, saith that prayer while washing.

Further, as to the vesting of the vestments, everything shall be observed as indicated on page 300 (2), with the following notes and changes regarding the order and manner:

All priestly vestments, as also the *Cincture [Belt]*, upon vesting are kissed, having previously blessed the same once crosswise (+).

The *Amice [Napleshnyk]* shall also be used, since anciently the Easterners also used it, as is proved by the words of Pope Benedict XIV: "The Maronites and Ambrosians place the amice over the sticharion" [^179].

Further, it is to be noted that first the *Epitrachelion* shall be put on, and then over it the *Cincture*; and as to the putting on of the Phelonion, the same is to be put on immediately, together with the other vestments before the Proskomide.

Therefore the note in the said Slavonic Liturgikon, page 301 (2): *"thus according to the Greek custom,"* etc., must be omitted, and the words: "Blessed is God Who pours out," for the Epitrachelion, shall be placed before the words: "Blessed is God Who girds me with strength," page 300 (2) of the Slavonic text pertaining to the cincture; and in the rubric: *"afterwards the priest (according to local custom)"*, those words in parentheses shall be completely omitted.

=== LEAF p162 ===
*(Physical Page 162 / Book Page 158)*

The vesting of the deacons shall take place thus: The first and second deacon, after the washing of hands, vest themselves, kissing each vestment: first the *Amice [Napleshnyk]*, then the *Sticharion*, next the *Cincture [Belt]*, then the *Epimanikia [Parakvytsi / Cuffs]* and the *Dalmatic*, and finally the *Orarion*. As to the *Orarion*, according to the custom adopted here, it shall be put on thus: One end of the orarion is taken and placed upon the left shoulder, letting the same hang down below the breast on the left side; the other end is passed across the back under the armpit of the right arm, and is brought over that very same left shoulder beneath the orarion hanging down in front, unto the back, so that the entire orarion when put on is like a crown [band/garland], resting upon the left shoulder, encircling the back and the breast, passing under the right armpit, having hanging ends or borders, one in front and the other behind the left shoulder.

There follows next on page 301 (3) of the Slavonic Liturgikon: *"Thus vested, the priest, etc."*, page 301 (3) of the Slavonic Liturgikon.

Next, the prayer: "Thou hast redeemed us..." Goar 5, which must be recited with joined hands.

Next, the *Proskomide [Preparation of the Oblation]*, as on page 301 (3) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, with the following notes and changes: The use of the *Lance [Kopiye]* shall be retained. As to the *Prosphora*, it is resolved to insert into the Sluzhebnik in the respective place, that is, before the words: *"Then he takes with the left hand..."*, page 301 (3) of the Slavonic text, the following note: *He takes five prosphoras, or three, or one. If there be none, it is lawful to take dried Lambs. The Lambs shall be cut out each week from a fresh prosphora by an ecclesiastical person; and if it be impossible each week, then more rarely, yet it is not lawful to use Lambs that have been preserved longer than one month.* — The prosphora itself shall be round, with the prescribed seal imprinted thereon; the *Lamb [Ahnets]* shall be four-cornered [square]. The constituent ingredients of the prosphora are: pure wheat flour, natural water, and leaven, and it shall be baked in the manner of ordinary bread. As to the placing of the particles, it is resolved to add unto the words of the Sluzhebnik: *"After this he takes the particle of the Theotokos saying, etc."*, page 301 (3) of the Slavonic text: *"if there be no particles, the priest may celebrate the Liturgy upon the Lamb alone."* When therefore there is no whole prosphora, but only the Lamb alone, then all "signings" with the lance, as well as the "thrustings" of the lance, shall be performed upon the Lamb itself.

=== LEAF p163 ===
*(Physical Page 163 / Book Page 159)*

There follows the pouring of wine and a little water into the chalice, that is, a few drops of water, it being understood of natural wine and pure natural water.

There follow the words, all as in the Liturgikon: "In honor and memory of our most blessed Lady, etc.", pages 301 and 302 (3 and 4) in the Slavonic text, compare Goar's text, page 58. Further, the words: "By the power of the precious and life-creating Cross, and the honorable heavenly Bodiless Powers," must be omitted from the Sluzhebnik, because in ancient copies those words are not found, and specifically in the Euchologion of Pope Benedict XIV [^180]; and besides, for the Precious Cross and the Angels particles are not extracted, because the particles placed upon the diskos represent the Church Triumphant (the Saints), the Church Suffering (the souls in Purgatory), and the Church Militant (the living faithful); while the Lamb represents Jesus Christ. — Therefore that prayer shall begin immediately with the words: "Of the honorable, glorious Prophet, Forerunner," etc., from page 302 (4) of the Slavonic Liturgikon text, Goar 58. It is resolved moreover, before the words: "Of the Hieromartyr Josaphat," to change the word "blessed" unto "holy," which is understood of itself after the canonization was promulgated [^181]—and to insert the commemoration of the holy Slavic Apostles: Cyril and Methodius before the holy Hieromartyr Josaphat.

Further, the rubric on page 302 (4) of the Slavonic text: *"Monks also add this: Concerning the most honorable, etc."* As to this rubric, that note pertains unto the entire section up unto the words: *"For Thy tender mercy, O all-good Master."* Therefore that prayer is read only by monastics, while secular priests omit it.

There follows in the Sluzhebnik, pages 302 and 303 (4 and 5) of the Slavonic text, the prayer: "O Lord Jesus Christ, receive this sacrifice, etc."; that prayer was inserted in recent times through abuse and altered; therefore in place thereof there shall be inserted here the following commemoration: "Remember, O Lord, Thy servants (N.)."

Next, everything follows according to the order on page 303 (5) of the Slavonic text. Incense is also placed into the censer with the prayer: "Incense unto Thee we offer," etc., see page 303 (5) of the Slavonic text and Goar 58. There follows on page 303 (5) of the Slavonic text and Goar 58. Then *"with the small veil"*, etc.

=== LEAF p164 ===
*(Physical Page 164 / Book Page 160)*

It is resolved regarding the veils: that all veils shall be retained, except the upper rigid veil, which, as shall presently be stated, shall be exchanged for a soft one. The veil for the chalice shall be square and rigid [stiffened], as is used among us in Galicia, and not soft and oblong as among the Greeks, because it is impractical and inconvenient; the larger veil wherewith the diskos is to be covered shall be soft, as among the Greeks.

Besides this, the pure linen *Iliton* shall be retained, according to our Ruthenian Galician custom, and not in place of the iliton the Antimension alone, as the present-day Greeks use; which Antimension shall be spread between the altar cloths, between the first upper cloth and the two lower altar cloths.

There follow the words: *"Then having taken the censer, etc."*, page 303 (5) of the Slavonic Liturgikon. That censing must not be omitted, as some do; but at the words: "Blessed is our God," etc., page 303 (5) of the Slavonic text, Goar 51, the priest shall cense the honorable Gifts crosswise, that is, with three swings: to the center, to the right, and to the left once—understood at a sung Divine Liturgy; at a spoken Liturgy the censing and the other ceremonies that are to be performed before the Royal Doors and in the Sanctuary before the Proskomide are omitted, and everything is done at the Table of Oblation privately, that is, not solemnly.

The rest of the Proskomide is as indicated in the Sluzhebnik, pages 303 and 304 (5 and 6) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar 51 (59), etc. If the Liturgy is sung, everything is left at the Table of Oblation upon the prothesis table, covered with the larger veil called the "Aer," as is prescribed in the Sluzhebnik. Only the beginning of the rubric, where it is said on page 304 (6) of the Slavonic Liturgikon: *"According to the local custom the Priest here puts on the Phelonion"*, must be omitted.

If, however, the Liturgy be spoken [read / Low Mass], then the Priest folds upon the chalice the purificator [lention / towel], upon the same the diskos, upon the diskos the folded asterisk, upon the asterisk the rigid veil, upon the veil the Aer folded in three, upon the same the iliton (if it doth not already lie upon the holy table, which upon the High Altar must always be located beneath the Gospel Book), upon that the soft veil, and the spoon, if anyone will be for Holy Com-

=== LEAF p165 ===
*(Physical Page 165 / Book Page 161)*

-munion, and if the spoon doth not already lie upon the holy table. Thus folded together, the Priest carries everything, having taken the chalice with his left hand, and holding with his right hand the veil upon the top of the chalice, he goes forth unto the Altar where the Liturgy is to be celebrated; before which he bows, and having set the chalice upon it slightly to the side, he unfolds the Iliton, sets the chalice in the center thereof, takes the diskos, sets upon the same the opened asterisk, and places it on his left side and of the chalice upon the Iliton, and thus placed, he covers them with the spread-out Aer—as is indicated at the Prothesis (the Table of Oblation) during a sung Divine Liturgy.

As to the prayer on page 304 (6) of the Slavonic text, Goar 51 (59): "In the tomb with the body, etc.", that prayer is omitted.

If several priests concelebrate together, only one celebrates the Proskomide.

*As to the Holy Liturgy Itself.*

After the completion of the Proskomide, if the Liturgy be sung, the Priest goes forth with the Deacons (if there be such); they stand before the holy altar [table of the Holy Mysteries], and having made there, all together, a profound bow with the hand reaching even unto the ground (it being understood, if the Liturgy is before an altar with the Holy Mysteries [the reserved Blessed Sacrament]; if however there be no Holy Mysteries, then with the hand unto the knees), they open the Royal Doors, and immediately the Priest, having blessed it, puts incense into the censer, and saying quietly the psalm: "Have mercy on me, O God," he censes, or, if there be Deacons, they cense.

The censing takes place in the following manner: If the Priest celebrates alone, he censes first the Holy Table from the front, then from the left side of the Sanctuary, that is, from his right side and from the east, then the Altarpiece Icon situated upon the wall, next the Holy Table from the left side (his left, but the right of the Sanctuary), and having bowed before the Holy Table, he goes forth into the Church and censes the Sovereign Icons: of the Savior, then of the Theotokos, and other icons if there be any, and having bowed again before the Holy Table, he turns toward the people and censes the Choirs and the people, and having bowed slightly, he returns into the Holy Sanctuary and hands over the censer.

=== LEAF p166 ===
*(Physical Page 166 / Book Page 162)*

If however there be Deacons, the Deacons cense the Holy Table from the front both together, then singly from both sides, and again together from the east as well as the Altarpiece Icon; they go forth through the deacons' doors into the Church, and having made again a bow before the Holy Table, each censes the holy Sovereign Icons and other icons from his side, and having bowed again before the Holy Table, they turn toward the people and each censes his own Choir, and then together the people, and having bowed slightly, they turn toward the Sanctuary, and having bowed, they return through the deacons' doors into the Sanctuary and hand over the censers.

If there be only one Deacon, he censes in that manner which was stated above concerning the Priest.

Standing before the Holy Table, the Priest with the Deacons (if there be such) bows profoundly, signs himself with the holy cross, as is indicated on page 305 (7) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, and saith: "Blessed is our God," page 305 (7), Goar 52.

There follows: *"Having joined hands..."* add: *"finger unto finger"*, as is depicted in the drawing, and the rest on page 305 (7) of the Slavonic text.

"Heavenly King," etc., Goar 52.

Then: "Glory to God in the highest," etc., page 305 (7) of the Slavonic text. Here it must be noted that after each "Glory to God in the highest, etc." he shall bow slightly once, and after: "O Lord, open Thou my lips," likewise one slight bow. Moreover it shall be added, that all this shall be recited secretly and without descending from the steps, as was hitherto in use, but all this takes place before the Holy Table itself. After the words: "O Lord, open Thou my lips," the Priest kisses the Holy Gospel, and the Deacons kiss the Holy Table. Therefore the rubric of the Sluzhebnik on page 305 (7) of the Slavonic text shall accordingly be corrected: *"and the Priest kisses the holy, etc."* There follows the mutual prayer or dialogue of the Priest with the Deacons (if there be any), which is to be done at the beginning of the Divine Liturgy with the words: "It is time for the Lord to act; Master, bless," etc., page 306 (8) of the Slavonic text, Goar 52.

Thereafter the Deacons, having bowed profoundly before the Holy Table, go forth, each through his own door, holding the orarion with the first three fingers of the right hand, with the left hand placed upon the breast, before the Royal Doors, and having bowed there

=== LEAF p167 ===
*(Physical Page 167 / Book Page 163)*

profoundly toward the Holy Sanctuary, they depart, turning sideways (toward one another) unto the center unto the place designated for the Deacons, that is, opposite the Royal Doors in the center, a few paces down from the Royal Doors; here, when all have taken their places, the first Deacon proclaims, raising with his right hand the end of the Orarion unto the height of his shoulder: "Bless, Master" (Goar 52). The Priest, standing in the center before the Holy Table, signs himself with his hand, and not with the Holy Gospel, proclaiming: "Blessed is the Kingdom, etc.", page 306 (8), Goar page 52.

There follows the Ecteny: "In peace let us pray unto the Lord," Goar ibid., by the first Deacon. The Priest and all the other concelebrating Priests recite the Ectenies and the prayers secretly, omitting nothing; and that not only in thought, but also with concentration of the Spirit, articulating distinctly with the lips, as is wont to be done at a spoken Liturgy when the server must answer.

As to the Ecteny: "In peace let us pray unto the Lord," etc., everywhere the Slavonic word: "Pomolimsya" shall be used with the stress upon the final "i", and not upon "o"—and it shall not be written with "yat" (ѣ), because here the word "pomolimsya" corresponds unto the Greek imperative; and therefore everywhere, where it corresponds unto the Greek imperative, in the Old Church Slavonic language the accent must be placed upon the final *i* (и́). "Pomólimsya" with the accent upon the "ó" would be indicative, while "pomolěmsya" with "yat" (ѣ) would be Little Russian [Ukrainian] or Russian imperative. In like manner also "Predadým" with the accent upon "ý" (и́) and not "yat" (ѣ).

There follows after the Ecteny the exclamation, which the presiding Priest shall sing: "For Thine is the kingdom, etc.", page 308 (10), Goar page 53.

The singers sing the *Antiphons; on Sunday, the Sunday ones:* "Shout joyfully unto the Lord..." *on weekdays:* "It is good to give praise," etc., *on Feast Days—the feast-day ones.* It is resolved that *Antiphons* and not the *Typika [Izobrazitelni]* shall be used in secular Churches and in monastic parish Churches; while in non-parochial monastic Churches, the *Typika* shall be used.

The Priest reads the prayer of the first Antiphon: "O Lord our God," etc., page 308 (10) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar 53. The Priest—or if there be more of them, the concelebrating Priests—

=== LEAF p168 ===
*(Physical Page 168 / Book Page 164)*

shall read all prayers distinctly in secret, and that after, and not before the exclamations, as is set down in some sluzhebniks. — The Deacons during the singing of the Antiphons remain in their places waiting.

There follows the second Ecteny, page 308 (10), Goar page 53, which the second Deacon sings, if there be one. Then the second exclamation: "For Thine is the dominion, etc.", page 308 (10) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 53, which the second Priest shall sing, if there be several concelebrating together.

There follows the *prayer of the second Antiphon* and the *second Antiphon*, and after this: "Glory be to the Father, etc." and "Only-Begotten Son, etc.", page 309 (11) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 86 (at the end).

The Deacons at "Only-Begotten Son..." do not enter into the sanctuary unto the Priest, but standing in their place, they bow together with the Priest standing at the holy table at the words: "Glory be to the Father: and Now:" and at "and was incarnate," page 309 (11) of the Slavonic Liturgikon text.

There follows the *third Ecteny*, by the first Deacon, since the Deacons sing the Ectenies alternately, page 309 (11) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 53. Then the exclamation: "For good and man-befriending art Thou, O God, etc.", page 310 (12) and Goar 54.

Next: the *prayer of the third Antiphon*: "Thou Who hast given us these common [and concordant prayers]..." page 310 (12) and Goar page 54; the *third Antiphon* and the *prayer*: "Master, Lord our God," page 310 (12) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 54. Priests shall always keep their hands joined together near the breast during the prayers, as is indicated in the sluzhebniks and represented in the depiction in the margin.

After the third Ecteny the Deacons enter through their doors into the Sanctuary, bow profoundly, whereafter the Priest hands the Gospel Book unto the first Deacon, and the second takes the censer, and together with the preceding candle-bearers they make the *Small Entrance*, circumambulating around the Sanctuary from the right side and exiting through the northern door; and having arrived before the Royal Doors, the Deacon gives the Holy Gospel to be kissed by the Collator [Patron of the church] (if there be one), then unto the people standing closest, then comes unto the Priest, and having bowed his head, saith softly: *Bless, Master, the holy entrance.* Goar page 54.

The Priest *blesses with his hand toward the east*, saying: "Blessed is the entrance, etc.", page 311 (13), Goar page 54. When a Bishop is present, He himself blesses the entrance and kisses

=== LEAF p169 ===
*(Physical Page 169 / Book Page 165)*

the Holy Gospel. Then the Deacon, standing somewhat higher, that is, before the Priest, and before the first Deacon the second Deacon, if there be one, and the Deacon holding the Holy Gospel raises it slightly aloft and proclaims: "Wisdom! Stand upright!" Goar page 54, and having entered into the Sanctuary, he places the Gospel upon the holy table—and the singers sing: "Come, let us worship, etc.", page 311 (13), Goar page 91.

At a spoken Divine Liturgy the Priest expresses the entrance thus: standing at the Holy Table he makes the sign of the cross before himself with his right hand, saying: "Blessed is the entrance, etc."

There follow the troparia and kontakia, and the Priest reads secretly the prayer of the Trisagion, having his hands joined at the breast: "O holy God, etc.", page 311 (13) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 55. There follows the exclamation: "For holy art Thou...", page 312 (14) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar page 55.

At that Exclamation, according to the local custom hitherto observed, the Priest shall at the words: "Now and forever" turn toward the people, extending his hands; likewise also the Deacon, raising slightly with the three fingers of his right hand the end of the Orarion, facing the people, proclaims the words of the conclusion of the exclamation: "And unto the ages of ages."

If there be no Deacon, then the Priest himself in his stead proclaims the second part of the exclamation from the words: "Now and forever, and unto the ages of ages," blessing the people with his hand.

After the Trisagion, the Priest with the Deacons descends before the steps of the Holy Table, they make a profound bow, as was said above, and here the Deacons change their position (place), that is, the one on the right side of the Priest passes unto his left side, and the one on the left unto the right, and they go behind the Holy Table.

There the junior Deacon or Subdeacon, passing around the Holy Table from the right side unto the left side of the Sanctuary, exits through the northern deacons' door into the Church and stands before the Royal Doors; while the other, that is, the senior Deacon, remains at the right hand of the Priest until the conclusion of the Epistle.

*Note:* The Priest goes out from before the Holy Table following the Deacon on the right side behind the Holy Table, saying the prayer: "Blessed is He that comes..." and stands upon the High Place (that is, one deacon on the right, the other on the left side of the Holy Table,

=== LEAF p170 ===
*(Physical Page 170 / Book Page 166)*

and the Priest following the Deacon on the right side of the Holy Table, saying secretly: "Blessed is He that comes...", remains upon the High Place, having on his right hand the first Deacon, while in the meantime the other, having gone out through the northern doors into the Church and proceeded unto the place of reading, having made a bow, reads the Epistle there).

If the Divine Liturgy be concelebrated, that is, wherein several Priests concelebrate together, then in like manner the Priests forming the right wing pass unto the left, and those forming the left wing unto the right, standing at the High Place, and after the Epistle they likewise change places behind the holy table and return unto their places before the holy table.

Then the first Deacon proclaims, holding with the first three fingers of his right hand the Orarion raised slightly aloft: "Let us attend!" Goar page 55. The Priest: "Peace be unto all," Goar 55, turning from the right side toward the people and making over them the sign of the cross; and the second Deacon, if there be one, but if not, that same deacon: "Wisdom! Let us attend!" Goar page 55. The Choir: The Prokeimenon.

Then: "Wisdom!" by the first Deacon, while in the meantime the second is already before the Iconostasis in the accustomed place, awaiting the time of the reading of the Epistle, and at the "Wisdom!" of the first Deacon, he proclaims the title of the Epistle, and again the first Deacon: "Let us attend!", and the second begins the reading of the Epistle; when there is only one Deacon, the reader or singer reads the Epistle, and the Deacon proclaims: "Wisdom!", and then: "Let us attend!", page 313 (15).

During the Epistle the Priest sits upon the High Place.

After the reading of the Epistle the Priest saith: "Peace be unto thee," Goar 55, and the Deacons assemble with the Priest before the steps of the Sanctuary, make a profound bow, and the Priest puts incense into the censer when the Deacons have said: "Bless, Master, this incense," Goar 55, with the brief prayer: "Incense unto Thee we offer," Goar page 55, etc., and they cense on all sides around the Holy Table, the Icons, and the people, as indicated at the beginning. The Choir: "Alleluia."

The Priest, when the Deacons—or the Deacon, if there be one—have censed the front part of the Holy Table, ascends the steps of the table, makes a profound bow, and reads the prayer of the Gospel: "Cause to shine in our hearts, etc.", Goar page 74

=== LEAF p171 ===
*(Physical Page 171 / Book Page 167)*

page 313 (15) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, having his hands joined at the breast for each prayer, as was stated above. When there are Deacons, the Priest doth not cense here. — After the censing the Deacons approach the Holy Table, bow low, and upon the conclusion of the hymn "Alleluia" the first Deacon proclaims, standing at the holy table and turned slightly toward the Priest, while the second Deacon holds from the left side the Sluzhebnik inclined toward the Priest (which must already be found there from the beginning): "Bless, Master, etc.", Goar page 55, having uttered the name of the Evangelist in the genitive case, that is: of Matthew, of Mark, of Luke, of John.

The Priest, blessing the Deacon crosswise with his hand, proclaims: "May God, through the prayers, etc.", page 314 (16), Goar 55.

At the words: "Wisdom! Stand upright!", the Priest hands the Holy Gospel unto the Deacon, who takes it with both hands, and having made together with the second Deacon a bow before the Holy Table, they depart with the candle-bearers preceding them unto the place of reading of the Holy Gospel; the Deacon carrying the Gospel goes forth through the Royal Doors, while the second Deacon and the candle-bearers go forth through the northern door and receive the Deacon carrying the Gospel before the Royal Doors; that place is before the iconostasis on the northern side, that is, before the Icon of the Most Holy Theotokos, with face turned toward the south (midday). If there be two Deacons, then the Priest proclaims: "Wisdom! Stand upright!", etc., see page 314 (16) of the Slavonic Liturgikon. Here it is noted that the Deacon goes forth for the reading of the Holy Gospel through the middle, that is, Royal Doors, and returns into the Sanctuary through those same doors, because the Deacon holds in his hands the Holy Gospel, which represents Christ Himself. If there be no Deacon, the Priest himself sings the Gospel from the Royal Doors, turned toward the people, and reads there the Holy Gospel placed upon an analogion or supported by one of the altar servers. After the reading of the Gospel, the Deacons give the same unto the Priest, who stands in the Holy Doors from the side of the Sanctuary, in the very middle of the doors, to be kissed, at the beginning of the reading, that is, on the side where the Gospel begins; and if there be several Gospels, at the beginning of the first.

=== LEAF p172 ===
*(Physical Page 172 / Book Page 168)*

At a spoken Divine Liturgy the Priest reads the Gospel always facing from the Sanctuary toward the people; and where the custom exists that the people place their heads beneath the Gospel, the Gospel is read from the Royal Doors; — it is better in both cases to read from the Doors when there are hearers, because for laymen to enter into the sanctuary through the Royal Doors is not permitted according to the custom of the Greeks.

The Priest, about to kiss the Holy Gospel, saith unto the Deacon: "Peace be unto thee (who announcest good tidings)," Goar page 56 (misprinted 64); when a Bishop is present, He is the first to kiss the Gospel. Then the Priest receives the Holy Gospel from the Deacon and places the same upon the Iliton upon the holy table. The Deacons return through their doors for the singing of the ecteny: "Let us all say," Goar page 56. Here it must be noted that, as everywhere, the Greek Optative ought to stand, which Optative is rendered in the Slavonic tongue by the imperative (more properly the Greek conditional): "Hospodu pomolýmsya" and not "pomólimsya" or "pomolěmsya"—just so here: "Rtsim vsi" (Рцѣмъ вси) and not "Rtsem vsi" (Рцемъ вси).

Next, the Ecteny: "Have mercy on us, O God...", Goar page 56, and immediately after those words the prayer: "O Lord our God," Goar page 56, and not lower down after the words: "Furthermore let us pray for the Most Holy," Goar page 56, because in the most ancient and best copies that prayer is placed before the particular commemoration of persons, and because the sense of this prayer itself indicates the same. Next, everything follows in order as on page 315 (17), etc., Goar page 56. There follows the Ecteny: "Pray, ye catechumens, unto the Lord," page 316 (18), Goar page 56; and at the words: "that He may reveal unto them the Gospel of righteousness," Goar page 56, the Priest raises the Gospel, and having kissed it, sets it on his right side to the side (better in the middle, if there be sufficient space near the tabernacle); the rest on pages 316 and 317 (18 and 19) of the Slavonic Liturgikon, Goar pages 56 and 57.

Next, the Ecteny: "As many as are catechumens, depart!" Goar page 57; the second continues further: "Ye catechumens, depart!", and again the first: "As many as are catechumens, depart!", and the second concludes: "Let none of the catechumens [remain]", etc., page 317 (19), Goar page 57.

The Priest during that Ecteny: "As many" unfolds at a sung Divine Liturgy the Iliton upon the holy table, which until now lay folded beneath the Gospel Book. There follows the pray-

=== LEAF p173 ===
*(Physical Page 173 / Book Page 169)*

-er: "We thank Thee, O Lord God, etc.", pages 317 and 318 (19 and 20), Goar page 57. At the exclamation: "That being kept under Thy dominion...", page 319 (21), Goar page 58, the Priest doth not turn around at "Now and forever, etc.", as was in use among us, yet without reason and contrary to the rubrics of ancient Liturgikons, but concludes the entire exclamation facing the Holy Table. Only after the exclamation, when the Deacons have assembled, doth the Priest descend before the steps, and puts incense with a blessing into the censer; when the Deacons have said: "Bless, Master, this incense," the Priest saith: "Incense unto Thee we offer, etc.", as was stated above, and they cense according to custom. If there be no Deacons, then the Priest himself after the prayer: "None is worthy, etc.", pages 319 and 320 (21 and 22), Goar page 58, descends before the steps, and having blessed the incense, censes. If the Deacons cense, then after censing the Holy Table, they cense the Priest, as the Greek Euchologia prescribe.

As to the Cherubic Hymn, that shall be translated from the Greek: "We who mystically represent the Cherubim..." Goar page 92 unto the end, rendered thus: *We who mystically represent the Cherubim, and sing the thrice-holy hymn unto the Life-Creating Trinity, let us now lay aside all earthly cares: As receiving [bearing up] the King of all, invisibly attended [borne aloft] by the angelic ranks. Alleluia.* And although in the latest edition of the Benedictine Euchologion printed in Rome it stands: "That we may receive the King of all," etc. [^182], which alteration the editors of this Euchologion permitted themselves according to the custom of certain innovators, nevertheless in the first edition that hymn is not found in its entirety, but only the opening words are cited: "Οἱ τὰ Χερουβίμ"; therefore according to the above-mentioned text the Slavonic translation of that hymn on page 321 (23) shall be emended.

After the censing the Deacons return through their doors into the sanctuary, and having bowed profoundly before the steps of the Holy Table, they go forth unto the Priest at his sides; and having taken the censers, they place the rings thereof upon the thumb of the left hand, and having raised their hands, they recite together with the Priest the Cherubic Hymn three times, signing themselves with the cross at each "Alleluia," pages 320, 321 (22, 23).

After reciting the Cherubic Hymn they do not kiss the holy table, as the rubric prescribes on page 321 (23), but having

=== LEAF p174 ===
*(Physical Page 174 / Book Page 170)*

bowed profoundly before the Holy Gifts in the tabernacle, they descend before the Holy Table, and there the Priest takes the censer from the first Deacon, and before his departure censes the Holy Table only from the front; all depart: first the Deacons, behind them the Priest unto the Table of Oblation [Prothesis]; having arrived there, they bow slightly, and the Priest having censed the prepared gifts, hands the censer unto the Subdeacon (the second Deacon), who places it upon his ring finger, that is, the second finger from the smallest; and the priest himself saith: "O God, be merciful unto me a sinner," Goar page 58, striking his breast, and then taking the Aer, saith: "In peace lift up [your hands]", etc., Goar page 58, Old Liturgikon 321 (23), and hands the same unto the second Deacon (the Subdeacon), who takes it with the first two fingers of both hands by both corners, that is, edges, with the left side toward himself and the right outward; then the Priest takes the diskos with the asterisk opened upon it and gives it, with an underlying towel folded in two or three if it be wide, unto the Deacon, so that he may hold the diskos raised aloft near his forehead with both hands by means of the towel, holding at the same time with his left hand the end of the orarion on both sides. The Priest himself takes the chalice covered with the veil, and they go forth through the northern door one after the other, preceded by candle-bearers: and that first the Subdeacon, then the Deacon, Priests if there be concelebrants, and at the end the presiding Priest with the chalice; when the Deacon comes unto the northern door, he proclaims unto the people: "All you Orthodox Christians may the Lord God remember in His Kingdom," etc., Goar page 59, page 321 (23); in like manner, if there be two Deacons, then the second and the other concelebrants at a concelebrated Liturgy proclaim the same commemoration; and finally the presiding Priest proclaims: "Our Most Holy Universal Pontiff, etc.", page 321 (23), walking slowly until he hath finished the entire commemoration; entering into the Sanctuary through the central (Royal) Doors, the Deacons await the Priest, standing, one with the Aer and the other with the diskos, within the Royal Doors before the steps, face to face with each other and sideways to the Holy Table; and then joining with the Priest, they enter together unto the Holy Table; here the Priest sets the Holy Chalice upon the Iliton on the right side, then receives from the first Deacon the diskos and sets the same with the opened

=== LEAF p175 ===
*(Physical Page 175 / Book Page 171)*

asterisk upon his left side; then he takes the Aer from the other Deacon or Subdeacon, and having made with it a cross over the censer as if censing it, he covers with it the Holy Gifts, already covered with their own veils, that is, the chalice with the stiffer veil, and the diskos with the asterisk with the soft veil, saying: "The noble Joseph, etc.", Goar 57, Old Liturgikon 322 (24); and then having received the censer from the second Deacon or Subdeacon, he censes the covered Holy Gifts three times crosswise, saying: "Do good, O Lord, in Thy good pleasure unto Zion, etc.", Goar page 59, Slavonic Liturgikon text page 322 (24).

*Note:* If there are not two Deacons, but only one Deacon, then the Priest places upon the Deacon's left shoulder the Aer folded in three and the censer, and then gives the diskos with the asterisk opened into his hands, as was stated above. If there be no Deacon at all, then the Priest himself takes the Aer folded in three upon his left shoulder, and the veil from the chalice he places beneath the chalice, and sets the diskos with the asterisk opened upon the chalice, and thus makes the Great Entrance according to what was said above, preceded by candle-bearers, one or two if there be such, of whom one carries also the censer.

At a spoken Divine Liturgy, at the words: "All you Orthodox Christians," the Priest doth not descend, but turns in a full circle at the Holy Table, beginning from the left side, so that he may at least in part express the entrance. Then the Priest inclines slightly toward the Deacon and saith in a quiet voice: "Remember me, brother and concelebrant, etc.", page 322 (24); part of this commemoration is found in Goar, pages 81 and 59. Upon the conclusion of the commemorations the Deacons depart, as indicated above, unto their place, and one of them sings the Ecteny: "Let us complete our prayer unto the Lord," etc., Goar page 59, Liturgikon page 323 (25).

Here it must be noted, that in the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great, in the prayer after "Let us complete": "O Lord our God," Liturgikon page 361, in place of the Slavonic word "vizhd" [look down / behold] there shall stand "prisiti" [visit].

After the Priest's exclamation: "Through the compassions of Thine Only-Begotten Son, etc.", Goar page 60, Liturgikon 324 (26), the Priest turns toward the people and blesses once with the words: "Peace be unto all," and turns back in a half-circle, facing the Holy Table. The Deacon proclaims: "Let us love

=== LEAF p176 ===
*(Physical Page 176 / Book Page 172)*

one another," Goar page 60. The Deacons kiss each other mutually on the left shoulders. The Priest kisses the Holy Gifts covered with the Aer: first the top of the diskos, then the top of the chalice, and finally the edge of the holy table before him on the right side of the chalice, saying at each kissing: "I will love Thee, O Lord, my strength, etc.", Goar page 60, Liturgikon page 324 (26). If the Divine Liturgy be concelebrated, then the presiding Priest kisses on the left shoulder the first Priest standing on the right side, and then the first on the left, who in the very same manner convey the kiss unto the other Priests standing by on both sides. Next the Deacon proclaims: "The doors! The doors! [In wisdom let us attend!]", etc., Goar page 60, Liturgikon page 324 (26); at which words the Priest raises the Aer aloft, taking it by both upper corners, and holds it above the Gifts—properly speaking not above the Gifts, but before the Gifts, somewhat higher than his eyes, more or less level with the height of his forehead, saying: "I believe..." At the words: "and was incarnate," he bows, lowering the Aer slightly over the Holy Table. Upon the conclusion of the Symbol of Faith the Priest makes the sign of the cross three times before himself with the Aer, saying: "Holy God, etc.", page 325 (27); then he folds the same in three, and having kissed it, sets it aside on the right side of the chalice at the edge of the Iliton.

The Deacon proclaims: "Let us stand well, etc.", Goar page 67, Liturgikon 326 (28), whereafter the Deacons enter into the Sanctuary in the usual manner, while the Priest proclaims: "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.", Goar page 60, Liturgikon page 326 (28); here the priest turns and blesses the people once; in case, however, a Bishop is present, He blesses the people unto three sides with the trikirion and dikirion.

Further: "Let us lift up our hearts" [Horí imiyím serdtsá — let us have], and not "imíyem"; here the Priest raises his hands aloft not much higher than his head, and at "Let us give thanks unto the Lord" [Bilahodarým Hospodá] he lowers his hands down, joining them together; the Deacons and the other concelebrants do the same. One ought to say *bilahodarým* (we give thanks) and not *blagodarěm*. There follows the spreading of hands and the prayer: "It is meet and right, etc.", page 326 (28), Goar 60. Next the Priest proclaims: "Singing the triumphant hymn, etc.", Goar 61, page 327 (29). At "the triumphant hymn," the Deacon takes in his right hand the right side of the asterisk and touches

=== LEAF p177 ===
*(Physical Page 177 / Book Page 173)*

with it the diskos above, below, from the left and right sides, whenever the words are proclaimed by the Priest: "singing, crying aloud, shouting, and saying" (Goar 61).

During these actions of the Deacon, as also during the consecration of the Holy Gifts, for convenience and to avoid overturning the holy chalice, the diskos may be placed slightly in front of the chalice; otherwise the diskos lies on the left side of the chalice.

There follows: "Holy, [Holy, Holy]", etc., Goar 61, page 327 (29); at the words: "Blessed is He that comes," Goar 61, the Priest signs himself crosswise with the asterisk, kisses it, and gives it to be kissed unto the concelebrating Priests and Deacons, if there be such.

There follows the rubric: *"Here the Priest, etc."*, page 327 (29); here in this rubric there shall also be recalled unto the one celebrating the Divine Liturgy the renewal of intention and of contrition or remorse. Then the prayer with spread hands: "With these [blessed powers], we also, etc.", page 327 (29), Goar 61.

Here it is noted, that in this prayer: "With these blessed powers, etc.", in the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great, pages 366 and 367, in place of: "and Thou didst turn away" [i otvratil yesi] there shall stand "and Thou didst bring back" [i vozvratil yesi]; further, in that very same prayer in the Liturgy on page 368, in place of the words "unto the resurrection from the dead" where the Greek text hath *ὁδοποιήσας τὴν Ἀνάстаσιν*, in place of the Slavonic rendering "Having made way for the resurrection" [Putesotvoryvyi voskreseniye], which is not sufficiently intelligible, there shall stand: "Unto that which is the resurrection from the dead" [K' yezhe iz mertvykh voskreseniyu] [^183], which is to be understood thus: "and having risen on the third day and made a way for all flesh unto the resurrection from the dead."

Further, at the words: "Taking bread, etc.", 329 (31), Goar 61, the Priest takes the diskos with the prepared bread into his left hand—thus shall the rubric on page 329 (31) be corrected—raises the same slightly aloft, and inclining his head when he pronounces: "having given thanks," Goar 61, then blesses the Lamb upon the diskos three times with his right hand, saying: "and having blessed + sanctified + broken + gave... etc.", page 329 (31), Goar 61; he sets the diskos in its place, and *"forthwith bowing down, looking upon the prepared bread, etc."*, page 329 (31). After the words: "Take, eat," Goar 61, the Priest with the Deacons bows profoundly, reaching with the hand even unto the ground; likewise also afterwards at the consecration of the chalice, page 329 (31). During the blessing the bells shall be rung, as

=== LEAF p178 ===
*(Physical Page 178 / Book Page 174)*

also above during the hymn (Holy), and then all, except the celebrant (celebrants) and Deacons, shall bend their knees without distinction.

Here it is to be noted, that the words of transubstantiation of the Holy Gifts: "This is [My Body]..." and "This is [My Blood]...", shall be distinctly pronounced and without change. There follows the prayer secretly with extended hands: "Remembering therefore, etc.", page 330 (32), Goar page 61; and upon the conclusion thereof, if the Priest celebrates alone, he himself raises with his right hand the diskos, and with his left the chalice, crossing his hands crosswise, the right over the left, and raises both slightly aloft, proclaiming: "Thine own of Thine own, etc.", page 330 (32), Goar page 72. If there be only one Deacon, then he raises the Holy Gifts crosswise, as was said above concerning the Priest, while the Priest standing in his place proclaims: "Thine own of Thine own..." If both Deacons be present, then both raise them crosswise: the left having taken the chalice with his right hand, and the right having taken the diskos with his right hand, so that the right hand of the right Deacon rests upon the right arm of the left Deacon; then having set down the Holy Gifts upon the holy table in their place, they bow low even unto the ground; then, when the first Deacon hath covered the chalice with its veil, he himself bows profoundly again, which is to be observed also as many times as the Deacon covers or uncovers the Holy Gifts, assisting the Priest in that office (it being understood that the Deacon, when standing beside the Priest, always covers and uncovers the Holy Gifts with the veils).

There follows the prayer: "Furthermore we offer, etc.", 330 (32), Goar 62. Next the troparion: "O Lord, Who didst send down Thy All-Holy Spirit, etc.", pages 330, 331 (32, 33), Goar 62, which the Priest recites with hands spread and slightly raised aloft, together with the Deacon, bowing after each conclusion thereof at the verses: "Create in me a clean heart," Goar 62; next at "Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me," Goar 76, a second bow; and a third after the threefold conclusion of that troparion. The Fathers resolved to omit the critical note regarding that invocation [^184] and to leave everything according to the present custom and rubrics of the Liturgies.

There follows next the continuation of the preceding prayer: "Furthermore we offer, etc.", 331 (33). The prayer: "That [they may be] unto those who partake

=== LEAF p179 ===
*(Physical Page 179 / Book Page 175)*

[for the vigilance of soul]...", page 331 (33), and the second prayer: "Furthermore we offer unto Thee, etc.", page 331 (33). After it the Priest takes the incense, puts it with a blessing into the censer, and censes the Holy Gifts three times crosswise, and hands the censer unto the Deacon, who together with the second Deacon, if there be one, censes—the Priest having stepped slightly aside unto the left—the holy table from the front, and then likewise the Holy Table from its four sides and nothing more; then they approach the Holy Table unto their sides. The Priest reads the prayer: "For the holy Prophet, Forerunner [and Baptist John]" (of Saint John), etc., Goar 63, Liturgikon page 332 (34); which prayer must be emended as to the Slavonic text, because there is an incorrect translation from the Greek in later editions, and in place of: "Of Saint John [genitive]", etc., there shall stand in the Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom: "Concerning holy John [locative]", etc.; and in the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great there shall stand: "With holy John [instrumental]", and not "Of Saint John, etc.", page 372; for although in the Greek text that case is required by the preposition *ὑπέρ* in the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, and *μετά* (with) in the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great, which prepositions govern the genitive case, yet in the Slavonic text "o" governs the seventh case (locative) and "s" governs the sixth case (instrumental) as also in the Latin tongue (*pro* and *cum*) [^185]. This also is to be noted here, that it is better to write "o svyátim" (о святѣмъ) and not "o svyátom" (о святомъ). In like manner, in adjectives in the dative/locative singular of all genders at the end there shall be placed "ѣ" (yat) and not "o": "O Presvyatěy" (О Пресвятѣй) and not: "O Presvyatoy" (О Пресвятой). It is noted here, that if there be no Deacon or Deacons, then at "Especially" [Izryádno], Goar 62, the Priest censes only the Holy Gifts and nothing more.

There follows next the said prayer: "Concerning holy John, etc.", page 332 (34), Goar 63.

Then the Priest proclaims: "Among the first remember, O Lord, etc.", page 333 (35), Goar 63. Next there follows the prayer of commemorations for the living: "Remember, O Lord, this city, etc.", page 333 (35), Goar 63. There follows the exclamation: "And grant us [with one mouth and one heart to glorify]...", page 333 (35), Goar 63; after which the Deacons, having bowed profoundly, depart unto their places for the Ecteny: "Having commemorated all the saints," Goar 64, which they sing after the exclamation of the Priest: "And may the mercies [of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ be with you all]", page 334 (36), Goar 64, at which exclamation the Priest

=== LEAF p180 ===
*(Physical Page 180 / Book Page 176)*

who is celebrating turns only from the side and blesses the people. The Priest then, having inclined his head slightly, reads the prayer: "Unto Thee we commend [our whole life and hope]...", page 334 (36), Goar 64, and the exclamation after the ecteny: "And make us worthy, O Master...", page 335 (37), Goar 64. Here at the "Our Father," Goar 64, the Priest spreads his hands, raising them slightly, more or less unto the height of the head, and recites the Lord's Prayer; the Deacons, however, already here at the "Our Father" cross the orarion crosswise, so that the girded orarion forms a cross upon the back and upon the breast, and both ends are tucked under the girding from the front in the middle of the orarion; and that takes place thus: The Deacon, with the assistance of the second Deacon or server, takes the end of the orarion hanging down from the left shoulder, holds the same below the breast in front, and then girds the other part of the orarion toward the right side under the right armpit toward the front like a belt, and casts it over the shoulders onto the right shoulder; then he takes both ends of the orarion falling in front upon the breast, crosses them crosswise, and tucks them under the orarion girded below the breast, so that the cross is in front and upon the back. There follows the exclamation: "For Thine is the kingdom, etc.", page 336 (38), Goar 64, and immediately after "Amen" there follows "Peace be unto all"; here at "Peace be unto all" the Priest turns toward the people, yet not with his back unto the Holy Gifts, but having stepped slightly aside unto the left side of the Holy Table, he turns with the greater part of his body toward the people and blesses them once crosswise with his hand, and with the very same half-circle turns back unto the Holy Gifts, facing the Holy Table; and when the Deacon saith: "Bow your heads [unto the Lord]...", Goar 64, the Priest, having inclined his head, recites the prayer: "We give thanks unto Thee, O King, etc.", 336 (38), Goar 65, and then having bowed low unto the Holy Gifts, proclaims: "Through the grace and compassions, etc.", page 336 (38), Goar 65; and having stepped slightly unto the right, he turns slightly sideways and washes the first two fingers of both hands, and having wiped them, he turns again unto the Holy Gifts, unto which he bows profoundly (the other concelebrants wash the palms of their right hands); and having raised his hands and eyes slightly aloft, he prays: "Give heed, O Lord Jesus Christ, etc.", page 337 (39), Goar 65; and after the prayer he strikes his breast three times, each time pronouncing: "O God, be merciful unto me a sinner," Goar 65; and having uncovered the holy chalice, he bows profoundly and immediately
