ACTS AND DECREES OF THE RUTHENIAN PROVINCIAL SYNOD OF LVIV (1891)
Tier 1 (The Calibration Anchor) — Cohort 4: Physical Pages 21–40 (Leaves p21–p40)

================================================================================
ORDO OF THE RUTHENIAN PROVINCIAL SYNOD (CONTINUED)
General Congregations, Solemn Public Sessions, Commissions, & Closing Rites
(Physical Leaves p21–p40 / Book Pages 19–38)
================================================================================


[Physical Page 19 / Leaf p21]

Then, having risen from genuflection, all recite further the following prayers: "Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us" (3 times); "Glory be: Both now: Our Father" and the rest.  
The Metropolitan exclaims: "For Thine is the kingdom" and the rest. The clergy: "Amen."  
Then: "Lord, have mercy" (12 times). "Glory be to the Father" and the rest. — "Come, let us worship" and the rest (3 times). And the troparia: "Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us" and the rest. "Glory be: Lord, have mercy on us" and the rest. "Both now: Open unto us the door of mercy" and the rest. Then: "Let us pray to the Lord." The clergy: "Lord, have mercy."

#### Prayer
"O Lord Jesus Christ, Only-Begotten Son, without beginning, of Thy Father without beginning, Who didst say with Thy most pure lips: For without Me ye can do nothing; O Lord, our Lord! embracing in faith within our soul and within our heart the things spoken by Thee, we fall down before Thy goodness: help us sinners to accomplish in Thee Thyself this work begun by us, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen."  
And at the conclusion all recite once the Angelic Salutation: "Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice" and the rest.  
Upon the completion of these prayers, the Metropolitan, having turned toward those assembled, shall greet them with a short address and set forth the purpose and necessity of the Synod.  
Following the address, the Most Reverend Metropolitan, by mutual understanding and agreement of the Bishops, shall summon all priests present and the lay Senior of the Stauropegion Institute to make a pledge that they shall observe secrecy concerning everything that shall be deliberated in the Synod, and that more or less according to the following formula:  
"All those here present promise upon priestly conscience (and the layman upon word of honor) that the decisions and everything else that shall be presented unto them for examination, as well as the deliberations and opinions of each individual, they shall not disclose nor reveal unto anyone outside the assembly of the Synod [^37], until the decisions shall have been verified and promulgated by the Holy Apostolic See [^38]."

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 20 / Leaf p22]

At this summons, all, according to the dignity of their station and rank, shall approach the Metropolitan and promise upon their honor to keep secrecy in the following words:  
"I promise this upon priestly conscience (and the layman: upon word of honor)."  
At this preparatory assembly, the Metropolitan shall command the Consistorial Chancellor to promulgate the decree on the election and nomination of officials of the Synod, whom he, with the agreement of the Bishops, had previously appointed. Namely:  
1) Court of Excuses and Complaints: consisting of one Bishop and 4 members.  
2) Promoters of the Synod: consisting of three members, one member from each of the three Eparchies.  
3) Secretaries of the Synod: four.  
4) Notaries of the Synod: four.  
5) Master of Ceremonies and three assistants.  
6) Theologians and Canonists: ten, namely 6 from the Archeparchy of Lviv, and two from each of the other two Eparchies.

### Instruction
#### For Officials at the Provincial Synod, Issued by the Most Reverend Metropolitan of Lviv, 1891

a) Duties of the Synodal Judges.  
The duties of the Synodal Judges in the present times comprise the following points:  
1) It shall belong to the Synodal Judges to examine the credentials of proxies and to demand from participants of the Synod the letters on the basis of which they have been summoned as theologians to the present Synod.  
2) They shall verify the excuses both of those who were duly summoned to the Synod, but being detained by a just impediment, did not appear, and of those who, on account of some unforeseen occurrence, shall submit a written petition to the President of this Court requesting to be dismissed in the Lord before the conclusion of the Synod. — Having received permission to depart, they shall return to the President of the Court the outline of synodal subjects delivered unto them.  
3) Likewise, to resolve doubts concerning the right of attendance or precedence and other difficulties arising among members of the Synod, and that, as Benedict XIV says: "by summary process" (въ короткôй дорозѣ / via summaria).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 21 / Leaf p23]

4) The Judges shall watch over the preservation of secrecy and with discretion admonish those who fail to observe it.  
5) It shall be the duty of the President to ensure that the proceedings of the Judges are recorded in a separate book, commonly called the "Protocol," and that upon the conclusion of the Synod a report of the proceedings be presented unto the Metropolitan.

b) Duties of the Promoters of the Synod.  
1) It shall be the duty of the Promoters to insist in a proper manner that the agenda for the General Congregations and particular Sessions be prepared and well ordered in due time.  
2) It belongs unto them to see to it that whatever pertains to the form of synodal proceedings, especially that employed at public Sessions, be carried out with the observance both of the order of the Divine Liturgy and the custom of ecclesiastical tradition.  
3) They shall fulfill ceremonial duties by turns at Congregations and Sessions, and they shall likewise read aloud, alternately with the Secretaries of the Synod, the contents of the Decrees to be promulgated at the Sessions.  
4) It shall also be their duty to collect both the minutes of synodal proceedings recorded by the individual Secretaries and those copies of decrees which, as authentic instruments, contain the promulgated synodal matter.  
5) Finally, upon the conclusion of the Synod, they shall submit all records of proceedings together with a corresponding report unto the Metropolitan.

c) Duties of the Secretaries of the Synod.  
1) It shall be the duty of the Secretaries to ensure that at least one day before public Sessions the announcement of the Session to be held be posted upon the doors both of the Metropolitan Church and of the city church under the title of the Dormition of the Most Holy Virgin Mary.  
2) They shall promulgate in turn the Decrees belonging to the program of the Synod, and read aloud by turns with the Promoters and others appointed from among the Notaries or otherwise assigned unto such reading, the matters to be announced at the Congregations and Sessions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 22 / Leaf p24]

d) Duties of the Notaries of the Synod.  
1) It shall be the duty of the Notaries to draw up the minutes of proceedings that shall be transacted at the individual sessions of particular Congregations. These minutes, having been read aloud if the President of the Congregation so directs, they shall present unto the President in due time for signature and safekeeping.  
2) Whatever the President of the Congregation shall direct concerning the manner of conducting proceedings, they shall make known unto the other members of that Congregation.  
3) To present unto the President the excuses of those who on one or two occasions could not attend a particular Session on account of a just impediment.  
4) Upon the conclusion of the proceedings to be transacted in particular Congregations, they shall collect the lithographed manuscripts of the synodal subject matter, copies of which are distributed at the first particular Session to individual members; and upon the conclusion of the Synod they shall present them unto the Promoters.  
5) That Notary who, in addition, shall hold the office of Notary of Synodal Acts, shall likewise prepare the protocol of proceedings transacted at General Congregations and public Sessions, and shall publish the contents of those protocols at the end of the Congregations and Sessions. These protocols he shall present unto the Metropolitan for signature, and, once signed, deliver them unto the Promoters for safekeeping.

e) Duties of the Masters of Ceremonies and their Director.  
It shall be the duty of the Masters of Ceremonies to oversee that at General Congregations and public celebrations everything is conducted in accordance with the rules to be observed in the celebration of the Synod.

Given in Lviv, on the date as in the proclamation of the Synod, 1891.

Sylvester Sembratovych, m. p.  
Archbishop-Metropolitan.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 23 / Leaf p25]

When the Officials of the Synod have been announced, the first Secretary shall summon the proxies of the Chapters to present their credentials unto the Most Reverend Metropolitan. When they have done so in order, they shall, with the agreement of the Provincial Bishops, be approved and admitted to the Synod.  
Then the Metropolitan shall ask the participants whether they know of anyone who is not present at this Synod who ought by right or custom to be present.  
After this, the Metropolitan shall command the reading of the decrees for the first Session, previously prepared with the agreement of the Bishops, namely:

### 1. Decree on the Opening of the Synod
In the name of the Holy, Consubstantial, Life-Creating, and Undivided Trinity, Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit.  
We, Sylvester Sembratovych, by the grace of God and of the Apostolic See Metropolitan of Halych, Archbishop of Lviv, Bishop of Kamianets; unto the praise and glory of Almighty God; in honor of the Most Blessed and Immaculate Ever-Virgin Mary Theotokos; of St. Joseph, Spouse of the same Queen of Heaven; of St. Michael the Archangel; of our Holy Apostles Cyril and Methodius; of the Holy Hieromartyr Josaphat; of the holy and glorious God-crowned Ruthenian princes Volodymyr and Olha; of the holy Great-Martyr George and of all the Saints; as well as unto the glory of Holy Mother Catholic Church and the increase of holy Union and communion with the Holy Apostolic See; by the counsel and agreement of the Most Reverend and Right Reverend Provincial Bishops, — decree and determine that on the 15th (27th N.S.) day of September, on the Sunday after the Exaltation of the Precious Cross, the Provincial Synod shall begin, which by Our Metropolitan authority We have announced, proclaimed, and promulgated.  
May the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort [^39] look down to our aid, and grant that we may sense the presence in our midst of the same Jesus Christ, His Only-Begotten Son, in Whose most holy Name we have assembled; and may the Holy Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the Son, enlighten our mind with the light of His grace and inflame our hearts. Amen.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 24 / Leaf p26]

### 2. Decree on the Making of the Profession of Faith
In the name of the Holy, Consubstantial, Life-Creating, and Undivided Trinity, etc.  
We, Sylvester Sembratovych, by the grace of God... etc. (as above).  
Whereas faith, without which it is impossible to please God, is the beginning and foundation of salvation; and whereas it is likewise one of the first and principal duties of Our Episcopal solicitude vigilantly to strive that the Catholic faith, held by the Holy Roman Church, may ever flourish unblemished and whole in this province: We deem that this Provincial Synod ought to begin with a unanimous profession of the faith which We believe in Our heart. Following therein the instructions and ordinances of the Holy Apostolic Roman See and the decrees issued for the faithful of the Oriental rite, as well as the enactments of our last Ruthenian Provincial Synod celebrated in the city of Zamość in the year 1720: We decree that We, the Most Reverend Bishops, and others seated in this Synod, shall openly and publicly make profession of faith according to the form prescribed by Pope Urban VIII of blessed memory for the faithful of the Oriental rite, and that according to the Slavonic text diligently reviewed and corrected here by the Metropolitan Ordinariate, and approved by the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith by letter of June 21, 1890, No. 846/14.

### 3. Decree on the Manner of Life during the Time of the Synod
In the name of the Holy, Consubstantial, Life-Creating, and Undivided Trinity... etc.  
We, Sylvester Sembratovych... Metropolitan... etc. (as above).  
Whereas We are conscious that Our powers are insufficient for so momentous an obligation of the Metropolitan; and conscious further that such is the infirmity of human nature that every sufficiency, of whatever kind it be, proceeds from the Father of lights: We, in celebrating this Provincial Synod, relying not upon Our own powers, but depending upon the assistance and help of the One God, Whose servants We are, implore Him with all Our heart in humility that He may sustain Us, govern Us, and incline Our mind toward that which is best and most salvific for Our province. We beseech the Most Reverend Bishops, Our Brethren, who have assembled with Us in our Lord Jesus Christ and the grace of the Holy Spirit, that all the resources of piety and the full abundance of their episcopal...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 25 / Leaf p27]

...virtues with which they are endowed, they might unceasingly direct unto the spiritual benefit of the province. Let them likewise strive, especially by salvific counsels and holy prayers, to assist the synodal work which We, by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit, have begun this day. The Honorable Dignitaries, Canons, and all Priests who have assembled with Us, and all other Ecclesiastical Men We admonish and adjure by the mercy of God, that, as at all times they shine before layfolk by the light of their virtues, so especially during the celebration of this Synod they conduct themselves in a manner pleasing unto God, mindful of their office, and live holily, as befits those who are called unto the service of the Lord; likewise that by the most holy Sacrifice of the Divine Liturgy they devoutly assist the work of this Synod, and with pure prayers implore God, the Giver of all good things, to grant unto Our minds the light of His grace, that We may adopt the best counsels and decree salvific enactments. — All and each of the citizens and inhabitants of the city of Lviv, beloved unto Us in Christ, We admonish and summon in the Lord, that, as always, so especially during this Synod, they elevate their spirit unto zeal for Christian virtues, that they entirely abstain from evil, turn away from carnal lusts, apply themselves unto prayer, feed Christ the Son of God in the poor, confess their sins, fortify themselves with the Bread of Angels, and daily with devout prayers implore the God of mercies, that We, in celebrating this Synod and in every pastoral undertaking, may serve the glory of God and the salvation of souls with reverent solicitude [^40].

### 4. Decree on the Non-Infringement of the Rights of Others
In the name of the Holy, Consubstantial Trinity... etc. We, S. S., Metropolitan, etc. (as above), decree and declare that if it should happen by chance that anyone, not possessing the right, were present in this Synod, or, possessing the right, were absent; or that anyone should not sit in the seat belonging unto him, or, without observing the order, should take the floor, or perform any other actions during the Synod: no one may infer therefrom that anyone's rights acquired outside the Synod are thereby infringed, just as similarly none of them acquires any new right and nothing is taken away from anyone...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 26 / Leaf p28]

...of his rights or possession, but everything remains valid and inviolable in the very same state in which it previously stood before this Provincial Synod commenced.

### 5. Decree That It Is Not Permitted to Withdraw from the Synod
We, S. S., Metropolitan, etc. (as above). We implore and admonish the Most Reverend Bishops who are obliged to sit in this Provincial Synod that, until the same be concluded and until it be dismissed according to custom, they depart not from the city of Lviv without just cause. If, however, any Bishop, for a verified cause approved by Us, should receive permission from Us to depart, he is bound to leave a suitable proxy, who shall accept in his name and that of his Church the decisions and decrees of the Synod and subscribe the same, as is the custom. Furthermore, all others sitting together with Us in the Synod We admonish and command that they do not depart before the conclusion of the Synod without a cause acknowledged by the Judges of Excuses and approved by Us [^41].  
After the reading of these decrees, the Metropolitan shall ask those present in the words: "Most Reverend and Very Reverend Fathers, are the decrees just read pleasing unto you, and at the same time is it pleasing unto you that, as they have been read, they be promulgated at the first solemn session?" The Fathers answer: "They are pleasing." — Whereupon the Metropolitan declares: "The Fathers accept the decrees that have been read; therefore, by their agreement, We confirm them as they were read, and likewise decree that they be promulgated at the first session of the Synod."  
After all this, the Metropolitan, with the agreement of the Bishops, shall appoint and command the announcement of the second synodal session in order, by the following decree:

### Decree Announcing the Second Session
In the name of the Holy, Consubstantial Trinity, etc. We, S. S., Metropolitan... etc. (as above). By the counsel and agreement of the Most Reverend Provincial Bishops, We decree that the next Session shall be held on the 22nd day of September (October 4), on the 15th Sunday after Pentecost...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 27 / Leaf p29]

...yet so that the designated term may in General Congregation be freely shortened or extended, as shall appear most expedient for the affairs of the Synod. — Thereafter the Promoters shall request the Metropolitan to command the drawing up of the record of proceedings of this first Congregation. The Metropolitan shall so command.  
This preparatory and first Congregation shall conclude with thanksgiving unto God, and that with the following prayers:  
"Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth and forevermore" (3 times). Then: "It is truly meet to bless thee..." and the rest. Then all recite the Lord's Prayer: "Our Father..." and the rest, and the Metropolitan pronounces: "For Thine is the kingdom..." and the rest. Then the Metropolitan, turned toward the Synod, imparts unto it the blessing in the following words:  
"The blessing of the Lord be upon you, by His grace and love for mankind, always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages."  
The clergy answer: "Amen."  
Then the Metropolitan: "Glory be to Thee, O Christ God, our hope, glory be to Thee."  
The clergy: "Glory be: Both now: Lord, have mercy" (2 times) "and Master, bless:"  
The Metropolitan gives the dismissal in the words: "May Christ our true God, through the prayers of His most pure Mother, of holy Joseph her Spouse, and of the holy and righteous Ancestors of God Joachim and Anna, and of all the Saints, have mercy upon you and save you, for He is good and the Lover of mankind."  
The clergy: "Amen."  
Upon the conclusion of this, all depart in peace.  
This order of prayers shall be observed at all General Congregations.  
On this evening from 7 to 8 o'clock, all the bells shall be rung in all the Ruthenian churches of the city.

## First Public and Solemn Session
At the appointed day and hour, all belonging to the Synod shall appear in the Metropolitan Palace; while all others of the clergy and people who are able to attend the solemnity, as well as the processions from both the city and neighboring parish churches, shall wait on the square between the Church and the palace until the Masters of Ceremonies of the Synod give the signal for the procession to the Metropolitan Church to begin.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 28 / Leaf p30]

At the signal given by the Masters of Ceremonies and upon the tolling of all the bells of the city, the procession shall set out toward the Metropolitan Church in the following order:  
The Cross of the Archeparchial Cathedral Church shall be borne by one of the senior members of the brotherhood of the same Church.  
The Cantors of the Archeparchial Cathedral Church.  
The suburban parish processions with their Crosses and banners, arriving with their pastors.  
The processions of the city parishes, namely: of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, of St. Paraskeva, of the Dormition of the Most Holy Virgin Mary, and then of the Archeparchial Cathedral of the Holy Great-Martyr George with their brotherhoods, cross, and banners, under the leadership of their pastors or assistant clergy.  
The Cross of the Metropolitan Chapter between two candle-bearers.  
The clergy of the Metropolitan Church.  
The Master of Ceremonies with the ministrants for the Hierarchical Divine Liturgy.  
The Metropolitan Cross borne by a Chapter Canon between two candle-bearers.  
Priests invited to the Synod.  
Deans who hold no specific office in the Synod.  
Theologians and Canonists of the Synod.  
Notaries and Secretaries of the Synod.  
Synodal Promoters.  
Procurators or proxies of the Episcopal Chapters and Canons of those Chapters.  
The Metropolitan Chapter.  
The Provincial Bishops with their chaplains and assistants.  
The Metropolitan and the Most Reverend Apostolic Delegate with their assistants.  
Note: The priests, concelebrants, canons, and Most Reverend Bishops with the Metropolitan shall be vested as is customary at similar ecclesiastical solemnities when a Hierarchical Divine Liturgy is to be celebrated. —  
Having entered the Church, the clerics and other priests who have arrived for the solemnity shall take places as convenience affords; the other concelebrants at the Divine Liturgy and Officials of the Synod shall take their assigned places in the choir proper, or presbytery; the Most Reverend Provincial Bishops shall take their places upon the seats prepared opposite the Metropolitan throne.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 29 / Leaf p31]

Note: This order shall be observed at all public Sessions that shall be celebrated, with this distinction only, that when one of the Provincial Bishops shall celebrate the Divine Liturgy, the seat for him shall be prepared opposite the Metropolitan throne.  
The Most Reverend Metropolitan, vested in all hierarchical vestments and the pallium, shall begin the solemn Divine Liturgy for the invocation of the assistance of the Holy Spirit, as found in our Ruthenian Sluzhebniks. After the reading of the Gospel, either the officiating Metropolitan himself or another person designated shall deliver a spiritual discourse unto the assembled faithful.  
If by chance not all the priests assembled for the Synod should be able to celebrate the Divine Liturgy on this day or concelebrate with the Metropolitan, they shall at least receive Holy Communion from the hands of the Metropolitan. Upon the conclusion of the Divine Liturgy, all who took part in the procession shall proceed to the place in the Church prepared for the sessions of the Synod, where they shall perform the devotions and prayers according to the rule indicated above for the preparatory General Congregation.  
Then all non-members shall depart, and only those who have been summoned to the Synod shall remain. The church doors — if it so pleases the Fathers — shall be closed, and the session shall begin with a short synodal address by the Metropolitan on the origin, utility, and importance of provincial synods.  
Following the address, the Promoters of the Synod shall move the opening of the Synod, more or less in these words:  
"Right Reverend Father in Christ! Whereas we see that all who by law and custom ought to be present at this Synod have here assembled in the Lord: I, N. N., named and appointed by Your Grace through Metropolitan authority as Promoter of this Synod, move and humbly pray that Your Grace deign to issue the command to open this Synod and order the promulgation of the decree on its opening."  
The Metropolitan answers: "We command that Our Decree on the opening of the Synod be read." He then hands the Decree unto the first Secretary to be read aloud from the ambo or some other prominent place.  
The first Secretary of the Synod receives the Decree from the Metropolitan, whose ring he kisses (as he likewise does whenever he receives anything from the hand of the Metropolitan), and reads it aloud in a clear voice...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 30 / Leaf p32]

...from the assigned place. — After the reading of the decree, which the Bishops hear seated, but the rest standing, the second Secretary shall approach with one of the Notaries individually unto each of the Provincial Bishops and inquire concerning their opinion, saying: "Will Your Grace deign to declare whether you accept the decree on the opening of the Synod just read?" Upon the reply of both: "I accept," the Secretary returns to the Metropolitan, and presenting unto him the reply of the Bishops, shall say: "The Most Reverend Bishops accept the Decree." Whereupon the Metropolitan announces:  
"With the agreement of the Most Reverend Bishops, We decree and hereby declare the opening of the Synod, which has indeed taken place."  
Immediately thereafter, the Promoter moves the making of the profession of faith in the following words:  
"Your Grace! Whereas the Most Holy Council of Trent established that individual Bishops and Priests assembled in a provincial Synod should make a public profession of faith and promise and profess true obedience unto the Most Holy Ecumenical Hierarch, the Pope of Rome: I, N. N., appointed Promoter of this Provincial Synod, move and humbly pray that Your Grace deign to command the reading and promulgation of the decree on the profession of faith." —  
The Metropolitan answers: "This We decree and command." The first Secretary receives the decree in the manner described above and reads it aloud.  
Following the promulgation of the decree on the making of the profession of faith, the Metropolitan, having removed his mitre, facing the Altar, kneels down, and placing his hand upon the Book of the Gospels, recites in a raised voice the profession of faith prescribed by Pope Urban VIII for Eastern Christians, as stated above, and the rest repeat it together after him.  
Upon concluding the profession, the Metropolitan rises, puts on his mitre, and sitting in the place prepared for himself, holds the Book of the Gospels upon his knees. Then the Bishops approach individually without mitres, and likewise kneeling down and placing a hand upon the Book of the Gospels, make profession of faith in the following words: "I, N., Bishop of N., profess the very same faith according to the form just read by the Most Reverend Metropolitan, and this I promise, vow, and swear. So help me God and this His holy Divine Gospel."  
After the Bishops, the other members of the Synod likewise approach, by threes or fours, and each of them makes the profession of faith in the very same words.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 31 / Leaf p33]

Then the first Promoter shall move that the Decrees which are customarily promulgated at the beginning of a provincial Synod be read aloud, in the words:  
"Your Grace! According to the ancient custom of the Church, the practice has ever been observed that at the opening of a provincial Synod the following Decrees should be issued and promulgated, namely:  
The Decree on the manner of life during the Synod and the Decree on non-departure from the Synod; therefore I, N. N., Promoter of this Synod, move and humbly pray Your Grace that those decrees be read aloud and promulgated."  
The Metropolitan commands the reading of the decrees in the words: "This We decree and command."  
The Secretary of the Synod receives the decrees from the Metropolitan and reads them aloud from the place indicated above. — The second Secretary with a Notary goes to the individual Bishops, inquiring concerning their assent in the words as above: "Right Reverend Father! Are those decrees that have been read pleasing unto you?" The reply of the Bishops: "They are pleasing," he presents unto the Metropolitan, who says: "The decrees are pleasing unto the Most Reverend Fathers the Bishops; therefore thanksgiving is due unto God."  
The Promoter then moves the promulgation of the decree concerning the Judges of Complaints and Excuses in the words:  
"Your Grace! Whereas for the conduct of the Synod's affairs it is necessary to establish Judges who should have the duty to hear and adjudicate complaints, excuses, and misunderstandings, should any arise, and submit them unto the Most Reverend Bishops for decision: I, N. N., Promoter of this Provincial Synod, move and pray that Your Grace appoint such Judges and order the decree on their appointment to be promulgated."  
The Metropolitan answers: "This We decree and command." The first Secretary of the Synod receives the decree from the Metropolitan, and reads it aloud in the manner indicated above.  
Finally, the Promoter moves the appointment of the second Session in the words: "Your Grace! At provincial synods it was always the custom that at the first session the day and place of the second session was appointed. Therefore I move that the same practice be observed now in this Synod."  
The Metropolitan answers: "It is proper to inquire of the Most Reverend Fathers the Bishops concerning their opinion." The Secretary of the Synod, approaching the Most Reverend Bishops, asks in the words: "Most Reverend Fathers the Bishops! Is it pleasing unto you that the next session be..."

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 32 / Leaf p34]

...held on the N. day, on the N. Sunday of the month of N., yet so that the designated term may in General Congregation be freely shortened or extended, as shall appear profitable for the affairs of the Synod?" And having received the reply: "It is pleasing," he shall report this unto the Metropolitan and receive from him the decree announcing the second session and read it aloud publicly.  
Finally, the Promoter of the Synod moves that the acts of this session be drawn up, in the words: "I, N. N., Promoter of this Synod, remind and request you, Reverend Notaries appointed for this Synod, that according to your duty you record carefully all who were present at this first Session, and prepare an accurate and trustworthy report of everything that was deliberated and transacted."  
The first Notary answers: "I shall prepare it."  
Then shall follow the conclusion with prayers according to the form and manner established above at the preceding Congregation.

## General Congregation II
On the appointed day and hour the General Congregation shall take place (the first after the preparatory one, and the second in general sequence), and since almost all the priests receive lodging and sustenance in the complex of the General Seminary of Lviv, it shall be held in the Seminary Church, where the other General Congregations shall likewise take place.  
The order of proceedings of this second Congregation, as well as of the other General Congregations, shall be almost identical with that indicated above for the preparatory assembly. Namely:  
All duly summoned to the Synod, in clerical dress, shall take their assigned places and, under the leadership of the Metropolitan, perform the prayers prescribed above for the opening of an assembly.  
Then follows a short address by the Metropolitan, as for instance: concerning the diligence to be observed in comprehensive deliberations upon the decrees of the Synod, and the methodology of conducting debates.  
Following the address, the Metropolitan shall command, according to the customary form described above, the announcement of the names of those chosen for the three synodal sections or Commissions, each of which shall have as its president a Bishop, or, in case of any impediment, one of the senior Canons or dignitaries. These Commissions the Metropolitan shall establish and designate their members with the agreement of the Bishops.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 33 / Leaf p35]

Three such Commissions shall be established, and their task shall be properly to deliberate and prepare everything that is subsequently to be decided publicly. Namely:  
Commission I shall consist of a president (one of the Bishops), a vice-president, and 8 or 10 members or consultors, as well as one Notary.  
Commission II, whose president shall be the second of the Most Reverend Bishops, along with a vice-president, 8 or 10 members or consultors, and one Notary.  
Commission III, whose president shall be one of the dignitaries of the Metropolitan Chapter, and the other members as stated for the first two.  
To each of these chosen Commissions are assigned the points of inquiry and subjects for examination. Then it shall be announced to all members of the Commissions that meetings of the Commissions during the Synod shall take place daily, before and after noon, with the exception of those days on which General Congregations and public solemn Sessions are to be held. Furthermore, it shall belong to the Bishops presiding over the individual Sections or Commissions to determine not only the day and hour for each meeting, but also the entire order in which the synodal subject matter is to be discussed. The meetings of the Commissions shall be held in the buildings of the General Seminary of Lviv, where a separate hall shall be prepared for each section, in which the members of that section shall occupy themselves with the subject matter pertaining to the Synod.  
The meetings shall begin with the following prayers:  
President: "Blessed is our God, always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages." The members answer: "Amen." Then all recite or sing: "Heavenly King..." as above; "Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice..." and the rest as above. — President: "Seat of Wisdom." Members: "Pray for us;" and the sign of the cross: "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen."  
Then the debate shall begin upon the points of doctrine or assigned subject matter according to the order and method indicated by the president.  
The subjects discussed in these particular assemblies, together with the observations they deem proper to make, shall be delivered unto the Metropolitan, who shall present them to the General Congregations as he himself shall announce, and in which all Synodal members are to sit, so that they may be submitted there to the judgment and approval of all participants.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 34 / Leaf p36]

The subjects examined by the General Congregations shall be weighed once again by the Bishops with the Metropolitan, and finally by a majority of their votes they shall definitively resolve what is to be established and decreed; these decisions the Metropolitan shall subsequently order to be read aloud and promulgated at the public Sessions.  
Here it is also to be observed that during the deliberations both of particular and of General Congregations, it must lie upon the heart of the members of the Synod to weigh everything diligently and maturely; and if anything should appear doubtful unto them, or such as ought to be amended, added, or omitted, each shall be free, in proper turn, to express his opinion, stating therewith the reason for the desired amendment. But in order that it may be known with certainty and precision what opinion each has expressed, each member shall submit his proposals together with the arguments supporting them in brief written form to the President of the Congregation or to the Notary performing the duties of Secretary, which shall subsequently be annexed unto the Acts.  
Upon the conclusion of the proceedings of each Congregation, the protocol of proceedings drawn up by the Synodal Notary shall be read aloud.  
At the conclusion, the order of thanksgiving shall be performed after each Congregation: after a General Congregation in the manner indicated above for the first preparatory General Congregation; and after a particular assembly with the prayer: "Beneath Thy protection..." and the rest, as above, and the recitation once of: "Our Father..."

## Congregation III in Order (General Congregation II)
On the designated day and hour all members of the Synod shall assemble in the manner prescribed above in the Church of the General Seminary. The opening of this Congregation shall take place, as in the preceding ones, with the customary prayers, and thereafter the points of doctrine of Titulus I, etc., shall be presented for discussion. The Promoters of the Synod shall read aloud in order one title after another, and the debate shall begin. Here shall also be read whatever was observed in the particular Sessions or Congregations. Upon the conclusion of the reading and debate, when, to the inquiry of the Promoters whether the public solemn Session already announced for the nearest day is actually to take place, an affirmative reply is given, this third General Congregation shall conclude with the customary prayers. Following this Congregation follows:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 35 / Leaf p37]

## Second Public and Solemn Session
At the appointed day and hour, according to the ceremonial indicated for the first Session, the Metropolitan with the Most Reverend Bishops, the Metropolitan Chapter, and all who are obliged to be present at the Sessions of the Synod, shall proceed in procession from the Metropolitan Palace to the Archeparchial Cathedral Church. The solemn synodal Divine Liturgy shall be celebrated by one of the Provincial Bishops. Thereafter all proceed to the place of the Sessions, and after the performance of the prayers and the celebration of the holy rite in due order, one of the Most Reverend Bishops shall deliver a short homily. Following the homily, the Promoter shall move the promulgation of the Decrees, more or less in these words:  
"Your Grace! Whereas after renewed deliberations of the Congregations and mature reflection of the Most Reverend Bishops, with the help of God it has now come to pass that further decrees and statutes could be adopted by the common agreement of the same Most Reverend Fathers: I, N. N., named Promoter of this Synod, most humbly move that Your Grace deign to resolve and command that the said decrees be now proclaimed and promulgated in this Synod." The Most Reverend Metropolitan shall answer: "This We decree and command."  
The Secretary of the Synod, having taken the decrees, steps forward to the designated place, whence in a raised voice he reads them aloud. After their reading, the Secretary with a Notary approaches the individual Most Reverend Bishops and asks: "Most Reverend Father! Are all these enactments pleasing unto Your Grace?" Having received the reply: "They are pleasing," the Secretary presents the reply unto the Metropolitan, who says: "The enactments are pleasing unto all the Most Reverend Fathers the Bishops; therefore thanksgiving is due unto God." All answer: "Thanks be to God."  
Then the second Promoter shall move the appointment of the third Session, which shall likewise be done as described for the first Session. Finally, the Promoter shall demand that the acts of this Session be drawn up; and everything is to be conducted according to that same method and rite as at the first Session.  
As regards the other Congregations, whether particular or general, as also concerning the solemn and public Sessions, all those Congregations and Sessions are to be conducted in the manner, order, and pattern indicated above, with this difference only: that the solemn Divine Liturgies at the second and third Sessions shall be celebrated by turns by the Bishops of the province in the presence of the Metropolitan, and likewise the synodal discourses at those Divine Liturgies shall be delivered by the Most Reverend Fathers the Bishops.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 36 / Leaf p38]

At the first Session the Metropolitan himself shall deliver the discourse, and the concluding blessing at all public Sessions shall likewise be imparted by the Metropolitan himself.

## Final Session and Conclusion of the Synod
On the designated day and hour, the Metropolitan, the Most Reverend Bishops, and all who were present at the procession of the first Session, shall proceed according to that same rite and order as on that occasion to the Metropolitan Church, and there everything shall be conducted in the manner already indicated. When it therefore appears that there remains nothing further to be transacted in the Synod, the Promoter of the Synod shall move the election of Synodal Witnesses, more or less in these words:  
"Your Grace! Ancient custom observed at provincial councils requires that at least two Synodal Witnesses be elected and appointed for each Eparchy. Therefore I, N. N., appointed Promoter of this Synod, move and most humbly pray that Your Grace deign to resolve upon the promulgation of the decree concerning the Synodal Witnesses to be elected and those chosen" [^42]. The Metropolitan shall say: "This We decree and command."  
Whereupon the Secretary receives the decree of nomination of the Witnesses and proclaims the same in these words:  
"S. S., Metropolitan... etc. Whereas custom in the celebration of provincial synods requires that for each Eparchy of this Province two churchmen, venerable in age and morals, prudent, and loving blameless life and discipline, should be chosen and constituted as Synodal Witnesses, whose duty it is diligently to see to it that the statutes and enactments issued by this Synod, when promulgated after receiving Apostolic approval, be everywhere introduced throughout the province; and besides this, it belongs unto them to report sincerely and according to the truth unto the Metropolitan of the Province—either before a future Synod, should this be required, or subsequently in the assembled Synod—concerning everything that, from the conclusion of this Synod until the nearest provincial Synod, should run contrary to the order of the Church and due discipline, and concerning all defects or abuses, whether among the clergy or among the faithful of their Eparchy, of which they may have learned and which ought to be eliminated through a Synod..."

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 37 / Leaf p39]

"...have represented the truth. Therefore, adhering unto this custom, We have resolved to choose and appoint two Synodal Witnesses for each Diocese [^43]. We therefore name as Synodal Witnesses:  
1) For Our Archeparchy: a) N. N., b) N. N.  
2) For the Eparchy of Przemyśl: a) N. N., b) N. N.  
3) For the Eparchy of Stanyslaviv: a) N. N., b) N. N.  
Those among them who are present shall be summoned unto the Most Reverend Metropolitan and take an oath before him upon the Holy Gospel in the following manner:  
'I, N. N., appointed by the Most Reverend Metropolitan as Synodal Witness for the Eparchy of N., promise, vow, and swear from henceforth and for the future, that concerning everything that in whatever way I shall hear and learn with certainty that might be desirable for the implementation of the Decrees of this Synod, when they shall have been lawfully promulgated; as also whatever from the conclusion of this Synod until the nearest provincial Synod should run contrary to good ecclesiastical order and wholesome discipline; as well as concerning all defects and abuses, whether among the clergy or among the people of my Eparchy, of which I might become aware and which ought to be eliminated through a Synod: I shall report conscientiously and truthfully unto the Metropolitan, either before a future Synod, should this be required of me, or subsequently in the assembled Synod. So help me God and this His holy Gospel' [^44].  
As regards the other appointed Witnesses who may not be present, the Most Reverend Metropolitan shall command that they take that same oath before their own Bishop, and that the Bishops subsequently notify the Metropolitan thereof.  
Thereafter the Promoter shall request the signing of the Synod in these words:  
'Your Grace! Whereas after the promulgation of the Decrees which with the help of God have been established in this Synod, and which have been accepted by the Most Reverend Fathers, it yet remains that the Very Reverend Fathers sign the same before the closing of the Synod: I, Promoter of the same Synod, move and pray that Your Grace deign to direct the signing of the Decrees' [^45]."

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Physical Page 38 / Leaf p40]

The Most Reverend Metropolitan shall declare: "This We decree and command." Whereupon the Secretary receives the said Decree and reads it aloud, namely:  
"S. S., Metropolitan... etc.  
When We, by the help of God, have reached the point where everything that it was pleasing to deliberate, ordain, and decree in this Synod has now been accomplished and concluded: We implore and admonish with brotherly love the Very Reverend Fathers who are participants of this Synod, that after Us, each one individually in his place and order, approach the High Altar (Velykyi Prestol) and subscribe that which in this Provincial Synod has been enacted and determined."  
After the reading of the Decree, all the Very Reverend Fathers approach in order unto the Altar, upon whose mensa on the northern side—that is, on the left facing the Altar—there shall lie one or more copies of all the Decrees collected together, upon which first the Metropolitan, and then the other Most Reverend Bishops and remaining Synodal members, shall sign in the manner indicated in the Synod of Zamość, namely: Christian name, surname, and title.  
Likewise the Bishops of the Province, as was done in the Synod of Zamość: the signature of Christian name and surname with their own title, and nothing more.  
Upon the conclusion of the signings, the Promoter shall move the announcement of the next Synod, saying: "Your Grace! At provincial synods it was the custom, at the conclusion of the final Session, likewise to appoint and announce the time of the subsequent Synod. Therefore I, Promoter of this Synod, move and pray that Your Grace, according to this custom, deign even now to determine and designate the time for celebrating the next provincial Synod, and order the Decree on the date of the future Synod to be promulgated." The Most Reverend Metropolitan shall answer: "This We decree and command."  
And the Secretary shall read aloud the Decree of the following tenor:  
"S. S.... etc. Following the ancient custom of provincial synods, according to which at the conclusion of the final Session the time of the nearest subsequent Synod is designated and appointed: with the agreement of Our Most Reverend Provincial Bishops, We decree and determine that the next subsequent Provincial Synod shall take place in the year 1896; yet so that this date may be freely shortened or extended, as the circumstances in Our Province shall require for the growth and welfare of the Church."  
Finally, the Promoter moves the closing of the Synod in the words:


================================================================================
CRITICAL APPARATUS FOOTNOTES (COHORT 4: [^37]–[^45])
================================================================================

[^37]: The First Vatican Council (1869–1870), *Constitutio Dogmatica Prima de Ecclesia Christi* (*Pastor Aeternus*), and its preliminary procedural regulations (c. 27), strictly mandated confidentiality concerning conciliar drafts, schema distributions, and internal oral votes to protect free theological deliberation from external political interference and secular press misrepresentation until official papal confirmation and promulgation. The synodal oath of secrecy (*secretum synodale*) was likewise standard canonical practice across post-Tridentine provincial councils.

[^38]: The Provincial Council of Orvieto (celebrated under the Archdiocese of Florence / Etruria in Central Italy), tit. 23, governing the exact wording of the obligation of secrecy imposed upon non-episcopal consultors, religious superiors, and lay auditors until acts and decrees receive recognitio from the Holy See.

[^39]: 2 Corinthians 1:3: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort" (Septuagint / Vulgate: *Benedictus Deus et Pater Domini nostri Jesu Christi, Pater misericordiarum, et Deus totius consolationis*).

[^40]: The Provincial Council of Vienna (1885), celebrated under Cardinal Archbishop Cölestin Joseph Ganglbauer, Tit. I *De ratione vitae tempore concilii ducenda*, which enjoined intensified communal prayer, reception of the Holy Mysteries, fasting, and works of charity upon the faithful and clergy during the celebration of provincial assemblies to invoke divine assistance upon the synodal deliberations.

[^41]: The Provincial Council of Vienna (1885), Tit. I, cap. 3, confirming ancient canonical jurisprudence (Council of Trent, Sess. 24, c. 2 *de Reformatione*) forbidding any prelate or synodal member who has taken his seat from departing from the council prior to its solemn closure without legitimate cause formally examined by the Court of Excuses (*Judices Excusationum*) and approved by the Metropolitan.

[^42]: The Provincial Council of Cologne (1859), celebrated under Cardinal Archbishop Johannes von Geissel, Tit. VII *De Testibus Synodalibus*, reviving the ancient canonical office of synodal witnesses (*testes synodales*) established in the medieval Church and reaffirmed by Pope Benedict XIV (*De Synodo Dioecesana*, lib. II, cap. 5). The synodal witnesses were upright clerics appointed for each diocese to oversee the promulgation and uniform enforcement of conciliar decrees and to report disciplinary abuses to the Metropolitan prior to the next provincial synod.

[^43]: The Provincial Council of Cologne (1859), Tit. VII, prescribing the statutory constitution of two synodal witnesses per diocese and detailing the procedure for their nomination and confirmation before the close of the council.

[^44]: The Provincial Council of Cologne (1859), Tit. VII, formula of the solemn oath (*juramentum testium synodalium*) taken upon the Holy Gospels by the appointed synodal witnesses, binding them to investigate and faithfully report infractions of conciliar statutes and moral discipline to the Metropolitan without partiality or human respect.

[^45]: The Provincial Council of Cologne (1859), Tit. VIII *De subscriptione et clausura Concilii*, setting forth the canonical protocol whereby all voting members and consultative participants subscribe the conciliar acts at the solemn closing session prior to the formal recess of the assembly.
