14 SEPTEMBER Universal Exaltation of the Precious Cross
Strict fast on this day the Lviv Synod permits for dairy.
The service of this feast is celebrated according to the general rule of Great Feasts of the Lord. However, it differs from other feasts in that on this feast the Bringing Out, Exaltation of the precious Cross and Veneration of it takes place. The Bringing Out from the sacristy to the mensa takes place in the Eve of the feast, after the dismissal of Small Vespers, or if there is none, then before the beginning of Great Vespers. From the mensa to the tetrapod - on the very day of the feast at Matins, during the Great Doxology. The Exaltation (Vozdvyzhennia) takes place on the tetrapod after the Great Doxology. The Veneration - immediately after the Exaltation and after every service celebrated in the church until the Apodosis of the feast (21 September). All this happens as presented below, first of all - the preparation of the precious Cross.
PREPARATION OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS
The Priest, having entered the sacristy, takes the aer from the chalice, spreads it on the Table of Oblation (Proskomedia), with the reverse side to the altar, and the face side - to himself; then he takes basil with his left hand (if there is none, then other fragrant herbs) and places them on the Precious Cross, ties it to them with a ribbon (band) and, placing the face side to the aer, wraps it together with the basil with that aer from all sides and, having wrapped the aer from all sides at the bottom, ties it firmly with another ribbon to the Cross: from the middle to the bottom of the Cross. Then he takes the Cross wrapped in this way with his left [hand], folds the aer with his right hand from the top to the bottom so that the Precious Cross and the face side of the aer are visible from the middle of the Cross and lower; finally he takes the diskos from the chalice and places it under the top of the Cross, between the basil and the Cross.
BRINGING OUT OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS FROM THE SACRISTY
TO THE MENA
After the dismissal of Small Vespers, or where there is none, then before the beginning of Great [Vespers], the Priest, wearing an epitrachelion, the Deacon, if there be one, - a dalmatic with an orarion of crimson color, according to the Lviv Synod, violet, stand before the Table of Oblation, where the precious Cross lies with basil branches, and behind him stand two candle-bearers with lit candles. The Deacon censes the precious Cross and says: "Bless, Master", the Priest begins: "Blessed is our God". If there be no deacon, the Priest, having censed himself, exclaims: "Blessed is our God". Choir: "Amen", also Trisagion and the rest with "Our Father". Priest: "For Thine is the kingdom". After this the Choir sings the Troparion "Save, O Lord", Glory, Both now: Kontakion "Thou Who Wast lifted up" ("voznesyisya").
The Priest, having bowed to the precious Cross, takes it with both hands and, having rested it on his head on that side where the basil is, turns and, preceded by two candle-bearers and accompanied on the right side by the Deacon who censes the precious Cross, exits the sacristy. The candle-bearers and the Deacon stand before the steps of the altar near the Holy Doors, and the Priest approaches the Holy Table, "lays the precious Cross on the holy mensa, in the place of the holy Gospel, and places the Gospel on the High Place (that is near the tabernacle, opposite himself) and a candle is lit before it for the whole night". At the end the Priest with the concelebrants bows and withdraws behind the candle-bearers and behind the Deacon to the sacristy.
TRANSFER OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS
FROM THE MENA TO THE TETRAPOD.
EXALTATION OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS AND VENERATION OF IT
TRANSFER. When the stichera of the Praises are sung, the Priest with the Deacon or deacons, if there be [any], withdraw to the sacristy and vest in all sacred vestments of their rank of crimson color, according to the Lviv Synod, violet, exactly as for the Liturgy. At the end of the stichera they go before the steps of the altar and, having bowed low, open the Holy Doors. The Priest exclaims: "Glory to Thee, Who Hast shown us the light". The choirs sing the Great Doxology, and the Priest goes out through the Holy Doors to the tetrapod, takes the Gospel and carries it to the Holy Table. Having taken the censer, he censes the precious Cross crosswise three times, gives the censer to the Deacon and, having bowed low, takes the precious Cross with both hands and, having rested it on his head, basil to himself, Cross to the people, goes out before the steps and, preceded by two candle-bearers and the Deacon with the censer, goes around the altar from its right side, makes an entrance through the northern doors and stands before the Holy Doors between the deacons and behind the candle-bearers and there awaits the end of the Doxology and Trisagion. At their end the Deacon, and if there is none, then the Priest himself loudly exclaims: "Wisdom, attend!". Then they turn, go before the tetrapod by the right side: first the candle-bearers, behind them - the Deacon with the censer, and at the end - the Priest. The Priest places the precious Cross on a pillow at the top of the tetrapod, covered with a tablecloth or a costly covering, censes it from four sides, and the choirs sing the Troparion "Save, O Lord".
EXALTATION: After the singing of the Troparion and censing of the Precious Cross, the Priest takes the precious Cross with both hands and, standing before the tetrapod, facing east, sings solemnly and joyfully the first petition of the litany "Have mercy on us, O God". Then, having signed with the precious Cross three times crosswise to the east, He begins to slowly bow His head to the ground, as much as possible (according to the rule - so that the head is a span away from the ground"). The Choir begins to sing in a quiet and humble voice, according to the rule, the first hundred, according to the present [custom], eight triplets, that is 24 "Lord, ha