[1]: Title of the original text: "Typikon of the Ruthenian Catholic Church." "Ruthenian" is the ancient name for Ukrainians.

[44]: In the general church rubric, not a single instance is encountered of a Saint with an All-Night Vigil falling in an Afterfeast on a Sunday, except in the midst of the feasts of Pentecost; but because the feasts of Pentecost have separate rubrics, when some Saint with an All-Night Vigil falls in the midst of Pentecost, then the rubric for him must be taken from the third part of this Typikon. However, in time, this case may happen even outside the feasts of Pentecost and a need for a separate rubric will arise; therefore, for the sake of this, we add these two cases to the instances of feasts: that is, a Saint with an All-Night Vigil on a Sunday and on weekdays, and their rubric may serve also in the case of a Patronal Saint.

[45]: According to the ancient rubric, a saint "on 4" could be of two types: that is, either with a troparion or without a troparion; and when the saint has no troparion, then at Matins, instead of "God is the Lord," "Alleluia" was sung and the divine service had a separate rubric. But in our current Horologia, troparia are given for every day of the month, and therefore at Matins we always sing "God is the Lord," and we limit the "Alleluia" service to Great Lent, as do the Greeks. Footnotes

[339]: Also in Russia the official Church marks the beginning of the civil year, as Nikolsky writes about this in the "Manual": "On the 1st of January with us (from 1700 -- 20) the beginning of the new year is celebrated".

[727]: The twelve-day fast-free period, from December 25 to January 6 both inclusive, we understand with the exception of the Eve of Theophany, for with it there would be thirteen days.

[241]: Thus is called the first day of the year, from the Latin indicere -- to proclaim, for on this day tributes were announced throughout the entire Roman state. Nilles, Calend. 1 Sept.

[242]: Synaxis (Συναξις), that is, a gathering of people for the solemn veneration of the miracle-working icon of the Most Holy Theotokos, which iconoclasts threw into the Gazoura or Zagoura lake at the Monastery of Miasena, not far from the city of Melitene in Armenia, during an attack; they found it undamaged after a long time (Synaxarion of the Greek Menaion on this day and Nilles 1 September).

[243]: The Greek-Venetian Menaion has the entire Matins - Great.

[244]: Pochaiv Menaion and Moscow Typikon.

[245]: Thus the Pochaiv Menaion and Moscow Typikon; but our liturgikons end the kontakia with the troparion of the Synaxis.

[246]: Thus the Pochaiv Menaion and Moscow Typikon, but Chapter 1 of Mark, which is in the Tserkovne Oko, in accordance with the general Greek typikon, Which does not have Sunday kontakia, gives only the Kontakion of the Indiction and the Saint alternating, that is on the 1st and 6th -- Indiction, on the 3rd and 9th -- to the Saint.

[247]: According to the rule of the Menaion (8 September, at the end) the entire service to the Saint is also taken; however, with us, for a Saint without Polyeleos it is usually not taken; just as the sequential Apostle-Gospel; for if one is already taken, there is no need to take [another], except in cathedral churches, at sung Liturgies.

[248]: Rule of the Menaion 8 September.

[249]: Menaion 13 September.

[250]: Menaion 7 September. According to the ancient rule -- also the entire service to the Saint.

[251]: Tserkovne Oko and Menaion 8 September.

[252]: Menaion 15 September.

[253]: Menaion 12 September.

[254]: This renovation, in Greek Εγκαίνια /renovation/, in Latin Dedicatio, or Dedication of the temple of the Resurrection of Christ, built in Jerusalem on Golgotha under Emperor Constantine in the year 335.

[255]: The Tserkovne Oko and our handwritten typikon do not give this first kontakion of the Renovation. But the Greek-Venetian Menaion gives it after the 6th ode; also we do not find the kontakion of the Cross, nor the kontakion of Cornelius in any edition, but only in our horologion and the Greek one of the Propaganda, and of the cross also in the Tserkovne Oko; the well-written typikon of the XVII century of the Lviv University library (1. N. 4), our handwritten typikon and the Greek-Venetian Menaion do not give either a troparion or a kontakion to the saint.

[256]: The Tserkovne Oko (in the menologion, fol. 268), and after it the Moscow Typikon (fol. 54, on the reverse) give at the hours only the Troparion of the Renovation and Glory: to the Forefeast, kontakia to the Renovation and to the Forefeast -- alternating, and to the saint -- nothing. We think that this rule will be good if the saint does not have a troparion and kontakion. In those editions where a troparion and kontakion to the saint are given, there is no reason not to take them at the hours.

[257]: Thus we consider; for in the case when the typikon does not give the Kontakion of the Forefeast, this one is added later.

[258]: Title XI. p. 4. b.

[259]: More simply, according to the ancient rule, the cross with basil is placed on a tray. Today's Greeks more often, instead of basil, place flowers under the cross.

[260]: According to the Slavic typikon -- also a phelonion.

[261]: According to our custom -- on a pillow.

[262]: Menaion 14 September.

[263]: In the Greek Typikon and the Slavic one of the Lviv University nothing is said about this bringing out of the precious Cross, except the Troparion "Save, O Lord"; Απέρχεται ο Ιερεύς και ο Εκκλησιαρχης συν τω Κανδηλαπτη εν τω σκευοφυλακιω μετά λαμπάδων και θυμιατών, και λαμβανουσιν το τιμιον ξυλον του Σταυρου, ψάλλοντες και το Τροπαριον Σωσον Κύριε τον λαον σου, και φερουσιν εις την Εκκλησιαν, και επιτνθεασιν αυτό επάνω της αγίας Τραπέζης, και απτει κηρος έμπροσθεν αυτό επάνω της αγίας Τραπέζης, και απτει κηρος έμπροσθεν δι όλης της νυκτός/The Priest and the Ecclesiarch with the lamp-lighter go to the sacristy with candles and censers and take the precious wood of the Cross, singing the troparion "Save, O Lord, Thy people", carry it to the church and place it on the holy table, and a candle is lit before it for the whole night/. (14 September). The beginning is usual and other preparatory prayers, that is Trisagion with "Our Father", as later Slavic typikons give, longer than this entire order, for it consists only of one Troparion of the Cross, and with the Slavic addition, also of a Kontakion.

[264]: Ancient Greek typikons mention nothing about a Deacon, neither at the bringing out, nor at the exaltation, nor at the laying of the precious Cross, but only about one priest. The Greek typikon, similarly to the Slavic ones, prescribes for the Priest to vest in all priestly vestments: αλασσει ο Ιερεύς πασαν την ιερατικην στολην /the Priest vests in all priestly vestments/. The Greek Triodion (Sunday of the Veneration of the Cross) and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, similarly to Slavic typikons, prescribes for the Priest to enter with the cross from the sanctuary to the temple through the northern doors: εκ του αριστερού Βήματος /from the left side of the sanctuary/. Greek typikons, with the exception of the new Constantinopolitan, and the Slavic of the Lviv University, prescribe for the Priest, having exited from the sanctuary to the temple, to head to the entrance doors that lead from the temple to the narthex, which are sometimes called royal, and there await the end of the Doxology and from there exclaim "Wisdom, attend", and then head to the tetrapod, which is before the iconostasis. Although these doors are called royal, βασιλικαι /royal/, one must understand that they were called so in the past. Today we call royal the middle doors of the iconostasis, which according to ancient custom are called holy: αγιαι ΰυραι /holy doors/ (chapter 96, Greek Typikon).

[265]: According to the Slavic typikon or, speaking more precisely, according to the Pochaiv Menaion, according to the Moscow Typikon and according to the Tserkovne Oko, the Deacon sings the whole litany, and the Priest sings nothing. And the censer, which with us the Priest holds with the cross, it would be better for the Deacon to hold and cense, as the new Constantinopolitan Typikon and the Tserkovne Oko prescribe on 14 September.

[266]: From the aforesaid we see that with us, according to the Typikon of the Lviv University, the Priest turns first to the east, then to the north, after that to the west, to the south and again to the east. According to general Slavic typikons: to the east, to the west, to the south, to the north and again to the east. According to the Greek Typikon: to the east, to the south, to the west, to the north and again to the east. The new Constantinopolitan Typikon prescribes as with us.

[267]: The rule of the Triodion of the Sunday of the Veneration of the Cross prescribes for the Priest before the veneration to open the reliquary of the cross: και ανοιξας την ύηκην /and, having opened the repository/, and in the Typikon of the Lviv University: "And after the opening of the reliquary of the cross". From this it follows that they had particles of the precious Cross in monasteries. The Greek Typikon and two handwritten Slavic ones that you have, do not prescribe for the Priest to sing separately "Before Thy Cross", but for the choirs; nor to bow to the precious Cross to the ground; for only the Tserkovne Oko prescribes this on 14 September.

[268]: The Greek Typikon prescribes before the kissing of the Cross three prostrations, and after the kissing -- one; and Slavic ones -- before the kissing -- two, and after the kissing -- one; however, today we make only one before and one after the kissing. Also the Greek Typikon, having discarded both last litanies, immediately after the veneration gives the dismissal: Ψαλλομενης δε της μεγάλης δοξολογίας, αλασσει ο Ιερεύς πασαν την ιερατικην στολην, και εισέρχεται μετά του θυμιατού, προηγουμένων των λαμπάδων, εν τη αγία Τρεπεζη, και Ουμιων τον αγιον σταυρόν σταυροειδως, αίρει αυτόν μετά δίσκου επί καιφαλης, και προπορευόμενων δυο λαμπάδων, φέρει αυτόν μέχρι των βασιλικών πυλών του ναού, κακεισαι ισταται. Και πληρουμενης της δοξολογίας και του τρισάγιου, λέγει ο Ιερεύς μεγαλόφωνος: Σοφια ορθοί. Και αρχόμενα του τροπαρίου Σωσον Κύριε, και ούτως εισοδευει μετά του αγίου σταυρού, και ούτως ευτρεπισμενου τετραποδιου, τνθεται ο τίμιος σταυρός επάνω αυτού, και Ουμια ο Ιερεύς σταυροειδως. ЕІ6 ούτως βολών μετανοίας τρεις, καν ποια εστίν ήμερα, και λαβών ανά χείρας τον τιμιον σταυρόν γυμνον μετά βασιλικών κλάδων, ισταται έμπροσθεν του τετραποδιου, βλέπων κατ ανατολάς, και λέγει εις επηκοον πάντων: Ελεησον ημάς ο Θεός. Και αρχόμενα της πρώτης εκατοντάδας το Κύριε ελεησον, σφραγίζοντας του Ιερέως εν ταις εναρξεσιν μετά του αγίου σταυρού. Είτα κλίνει την καιφαλην όσον σπιύαμην από της γης, και καταμικρον ανισταται άχρι συμπληρωσεος της εκατοντάδας. Ηνικα δε φθάσει ενς το 97 Κύριε ελεησον, υψοι την φωνην ο Εκκλησιαρχης, ήγουν το Κύριε ελεησον τρις, και αισθομενος ο Ιερεύς τέλος λαμβάνειν την εκατοντάδα, σφραγίζει πάλιν τρις. Είτα στραφείς επί το νοτιον μέρος, λέγει: Ετι δεομεβα... και αρχόμενα της δευτέρας εκατοντάδας, και ποιεί ο Ιερεύς την δεύτερον υψωσιν, ως προγεγραπται. Ειύ ούτως στραφείς επί δυσμάς λέγει: Ετι δεομεθα, και αρχόμενα της τρίτης εκατοντάδας. Πληρωμένης δε αυτής, στρέφεται ο Ιερεύς επί το βορειον μέρος, και λέγει: Ετι δεομεθα... και γίνεται η τετάρτη υψωσις. Και ούτως στρέφεται ο Ιερεύς κατ ανατολάς, και λέγει: Ετι δεομεύα... και αρχομεΟα της πέμπτης εκατοντάδας. Μετά δε την πεμπτην υψωσιν ψαλλομεν το Κοντακιον Ο υψωθείς. ЕІІ9 ούτως: Τον σταυρόν σου προσκυνουμεν Δέσποτα τρεις. Ψαλλόντων δε των αδελφών, αποτι6ισιν ο Ιερεύς το τιμιον ξυλον εν τετραποδιω, και αρχόμενα προσκυνειν, ο τε Ιερεύς, και ο Προεστως, ποιουντες και μετανοίας τρεις κατενωπιον του τυμιου σταυρού, είτα ασπάζονται. Και μετά το ασπαζαστ)αι βαλλουσιν μιαν μετανοιαν; ειΰ ούτως εις τους χορούς δεξιά και αριστερά. Είτα εισέρχονται οι αδελφοί δυο δυο κατά ταξιν, και προσκυνουσι και ασπάζονται ομοίως. Ψαλλομεν δε και τα στιχηρα ιδιομελα, αχρις ουν προσκυνουσιν οι αδελφοί, εις ηχον β το Δεύτε πιστοί. Και μετά το προσκυνησαι παντός λέγει ο Ιερεύς: Σοφια, και Απολυσις /During the singing of the Great Doxology the Priest vests in all priestly vestments and proceeds with the censer, preceded by candle-bearers, to the holy table. Having censed the holy cross crosswise, he takes it with the diskos on his head and, preceded by two candle-bearers, carries it to the royal doors of the temple, remaining there. At the end of the Doxology and Trisagion, the Priest loudly exclaims: "Wisdom, attend!" and we begin the troparion "Save, O Lord". The Priest enters with the holy cross and places the precious cross on the prepared tetrapod, having censed it crosswise. Then, having bowed three times, whatever day it may be, he takes into his hands the precious cross, wrapped with basil branches, stands before the tetrapod, looking to the east, and says so that all can hear: "Have mercy on us, O God". And we begin "Lord, have mercy" of the first hundred, and the Priest at the beginning blesses with the holy cross. After this he bows his head to, approximately, a quarter of a meter from the ground and gradually rises until the end of the hundred. When "Lord, have mercy" is sung for the 97th time, the Ecclesiarch raises his voice. Then "Lord, have mercy" is sung three times, and the Priest, noticing that the hundred is coming to an end, again signs three times with the cross. Then he, having turned to the south, says: "Again we pray" and we begin the second hundred, and the Priest performs the second exaltation of the cross, as prescribed. Then, turned to the west, says: "Again we pray" and we begin the third hundred. At the end, the Priest turns to the north and says: "Again we pray" and the fourth exaltation takes place. Then the Priest turns to the east and says: "Again we pray" and we begin the fifth hundred. After the fifth exaltation we sing the Kontakion "Thou Who Wast lifted up" ("Voznesyisya"). Then "Before Thy Cross" is sung three times. While the brethren sing, the Priest places the precious cross on the tetrapod and we begin to venerate. The Priest and the Superior, having bowed three times before the precious cross, kiss it. After kissing they bow once. Also those in the choirs on the right and left. Then the brethren approach two by two, according to rank, bowing, simultaneously and kiss. We sing the stichera idiomesa, while the brethren venerate, in Tone 2 "Come, ye faithful". And when all have finished venerating, the Priest exclaims: "Wisdom!" and the dismissal follows/ (14 September).

[269]: Thus our menaia and Moscow Typikon (15 September). And when the typikons say nothing about the sequential Apostle and Gospel, then, however, they can be taken in the second place, as on the Apodosis of the feast 21 September, when it falls on a Sunday, and when -- not, then even on the Apodosis of the Exaltation not to take the sequential ones, so that there would be a certain coordination of rules.

[270]: Menaion 15 September.

[271]: Eparchial News. 4 September 1898, part XVI, p. 149.

[272]: Thus our Pochaiv Menaion, Tserkovne Oko and Moscow Typikon. But our liturgikons, horologia and the Greek-Venetian Menaion of 1755 prescribe to take the Service of the Holy Fathers on the Sunday following 11 October; one must understand, that when 11 October falls on a weekday; similarly in the latest Greek-Venetian Menaion (1884) and in the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, where it is prescribed to take on the very day of 11 October, if Sunday, if -- not, then on the following Sunday. What shall we say to this? We consider that all these rules are good, however, it is not good when liturgical books of one and the same church province give uncoordinated rules. For when we accept the rule of our Menaion, then let it be placed also in the liturgikons And in the horologia, for when we accept the rule of the latter, then let It be also in the Menaion. And if we adhere to the rule of the Menaion, then it is necessary to present it already on 8 October, so that, reading, one can notice about the Following Sunday. This must be understood also about the Service of the Holy Fathers of the First Six Councils on 16 July, which the menaia both ours and Greek, Prescribe to transfer back, to 13 July, if it falls on Wednesday; the Greek menaia present this not in accordance with their rule on 11 October, when they prescribe to transfer this service from 16 July back, they have to transfer it back also from 11 October. It seems to us, And it would be simpler not to transfer these services back, but to take on the very [days of] 11 October and 16 July, when they fall on Sunday, if -- not, on the following Sunday.

[273]: According to the rule of our Menaion, Moscow Typikon and Tserkovne Oko, first everything -- to the Earthquake, and then -- to the Saint. In the Greek-Venetian Menaion of 1755 Prokeimenon, Apostle, Alleluia, Gospel and Communion Hymn -- only to the Saint, and in the latest, of 1884, first -- to the Saint, and afterwards -- to the Earthquake. In the new Constantinopolitan -- Troparia of the Earthquake, and everything else -- only to the Saint. According to the general Slavic typikon, which is adhered to only in cathedral churches, before the Apostle-Gospel of the Saint, the Apostle-Gospel also of the day is taken.

[274]: Thus the typikons both Greek and Slavic, but since the latter are taken from the Greek ones, which generally do not have Sunday kontakia, and Slavic ones do, we think that Slavs should take also the Sunday Kontakion alternating with the others, that is on the 1st -- Resurrectional; on the 3rd -- of the Earthquake; on the 6th -- to the Saint; on the 9th -- again Resurrectional.

[275]: According to the rule of our Menaion, Moscow Typikon and Tserkovne Oko -- / Resurrectional Troparion, of the Earthquake and of the Saint. Resurrectional Kontakion, Glory: to the Saint, Both now: of the Earthquake. Everything else -- to the Earthquake, and afterwards -- to the Saint; Apostle-Gospel -- sequential, under the Prokeimenon (zaspiv). The Greek Menaion of 1755 gives nothing of the Earthquake.

[276]: It would be better to transfer it to 12 November, so that with the change of the calendar there would be no confusion in new editions of church books. For already this year, 1900, the day 31 October corresponds not to 12, but to 13 November.

[277]: Some consider, according to the edition of the Peremyshl Typikon of 1870, p. 271, that neither on St. Michael, nor on St. Prophet Elias, should "Blessed is the man" be sung and, that then not a single kathisma is taken, for this kathisma, as the publisher writes about it, is found only in the Pochaiv Anthologion, and in the most ancient menaia and Anthologia they are not mentioned; the reason for this is considered to be that "Elias did not die, and St. Michael, as bodiless, is not subject to death". However, this is not enough. For regarding the rule, not only the Pochaiv Anthologion (Anthologion) of 1777 and the Pochaiv Menaion of the same year, but also the Lviv Anthologion (Anthologion) of 1643 and the Great Typikon, under the title Tserkovne Oko, printed in Moscow in 1615, that is more than a century and a half before the Pochaiv Anthologion, and the manuscript Anthologion of 1736, which we have, and the Typikon of the All-Russian Church, printed in Moscow in 1859, by the decision of its Governing Synod, give also on these two feasts the kathisma "Blessed is the man". Although some rules, like the Moscow Menaion of 1782, the Greek-Venetian of 1884 do not give "Blessed is the man", it does not follow from this that no kathisma is needed, for even on Saints without Polyeleos in the Menaion a kathisma is not given, but the sequential one is meant; so here one can understand the sequential one, which three ancient handwritten Slavic typikons give: one -- of the Lviv University, the second -- of St. Onuphrius in Lviv, and the third -- of the library of the Chapter of St. George; also Tserkovne Oko (which gives two rules: one with "Blessed is the man", and the second with the sequential kathisma). The reason that these rules give for these two feasts a sequential kathisma, may lie in the fact that their service initially had neither All-Night Vigil nor Polyeleos, but gradually, with time, grew into All-Night Vigil. About St. Elias it is written in the Pochaiv Menaion: "Let it be known that in printed Greek menaia, in handwritten typikons, and also in Slavic handwritten and printed typikons, the service of the Prophet Elias is given on 6, with Octoechos". And regarding St. Michael, the above-mentioned Slavic typikons give him a service only of the Polyeleos type, but incomplete, for they partially combine his service with the service of the Octoechos, as for a Saint without Polyeleos.

[278]: According to the known general explanation of the Sacred Congregation of Indulgences, in the usual expression: Pater et Ave, the number e. g. 7 or 5, standing only before Pater, refers also to Ave. See e. g. Decrees of the Sacred Congregation of Indulgences of 22 March 1847, about the pious order of St. Joseph the Betrothed.