=== LEAF p211 ===
[Book Page 187]

for the Catechumens, saying: “Pray unto the Lord, ye catechumens,” etc. (The priest saith this litany secretly.) When the subdeacon comes unto the words: “That He may reveal unto them the Gospel of righteousness,” then the priest, having kissed the Gospel Book, places it upon the right side. After the exclamation: “That they also with us may glorify Thine all-honorable and majestic name...” etc., the senior deacon—standing beside the priest—turns toward the people and exclaims: “All ye who are catechumens, depart”; and the subdeacon—standing upon the ambo—continues: “Ye catechumens, depart”; and thereafter the senior deacon saith again: “All ye who are catechumens, depart”; and the subdeacon continues: “Let none of the catechumens remain...” etc., and hereby the Liturgy of the Catechumens is concluded. And after this begins the III. Part of the Liturgy: The Liturgy of the Faithful.

§. 141.

(c) The Order of the Liturgy of the Faithful.

When the catechumens have been summoned by the deacon’s exclamation to depart the church, the priest unfolds upon the holy Altar-Table the folded Iliton, as it were for a sign that before the eyes of the faithful the greatest mystery instituted by Jesus Christ for our salvation is unveiled and accomplished. And after this the priest reads the 1st Prayer of the Faithful, saying secretly: “We give thanks unto Thee, O Lord God of Hosts...” etc. And while the priest reads the prayer, the deacon exclaims: “Help us, save us, have mercy on us...” etc., unto which the choir answers: “Lord, have mercy.” And immediately before the exclamation the deacon saith: “Wisdom!” (*Премꙋ́дрость!*) and the priest with a loud voice pronounces the exclamation: “For unto Thee is due all glory, honor, and worship...” etc. After this exclamation the deacon saith: “Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord,” and the priest reads the 2nd Prayer of the Faithful. During the prayer of the priest the subdeacon saith again: “Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and protect us by Thy grace,” unto which the choir sings: “Lord, have mercy.” Before the exclamation: “That being ever guarded under Thy dominion...” etc., the subdeacon saith again: “Wisdom!” (*Премꙋ́дрость!*)[^195] and the priest makes the exclamation, in which at the words: “now and forever” he turns toward the people, blessing them.

After this the subdeacon enters into the holy Sanctuary [Altar], and having opened the Royal Doors, goes unto the priest; the senior deacon, having received the cen-

=== LEAF p212 ===
[Book Page 188]

-ser and a blessing from the priest, descends from the holy Altar-Table, censes the holy Altar-Table round about, likewise also the Table of Preparation [Prothesis], and coming unto the Royal Doors censes thence first the icon of the Savior, thereafter that of the Theotokos, and finally the people. After this he enters unto the Altar-Table, bringing the censer with him. (If there is no deacon, the priest himself censes, reciting Psalm 50.) After this the priest, standing at the holy Altar-Table, saith first the prayer: “None is worthy of them that are bound with carnal lusts and pleasures...” etc., and after this Psalm 50. At the last the priest, having taken the censer into his left hand from the deacon, with outstretched hands saith thrice, signing himself with the cross: “Let us who mystically represent the Cherubim, and sing the thrice-holy hymn unto the life-creating Trinity, now lay aside all earthly care...” etc. After each repetition he makes a bow, and after the third repetition, having bowed, he kisses the holy Altar-Table and the Cross. After this he goes forth unto the Royal Doors, and having censed the holy Sanctuary [Altar], he departs unto the Table of Preparation [Prothesis], the deacons preceding him, where he likewise censes the offered gifts, praying within himself: “O God, be merciful unto me a sinner!” (While the priest prays and the deacon censes, the choir sings: “Let us who mystically represent the Cherubim...”[^196])

Here at the Table of Preparation [Prothesis] the priest, having censed the gifts, gives the censer unto the subdeacon; and having taken the Aer, gives it likewise unto the subdeacon, who, having received it into both hands, holds it before his face and carries it, candle-bearers preceding them. Having taken the Diskos with the Asterisk [Star], he gives it unto the deacon, who, upon the conclusion of the singing of “Let us who mystically represent the Cherubim,” exclaims: “May the Lord God remember all you Orthodox Christians in His kingdom, always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages.” (If the deacon is only a cleric, he then carries the censer.) The priest after this, having taken the holy Chalice into his hands, goes forth after the deacons through the northern door. (If, however, the priest celebrates alone, then, having placed the Aer upon his left shoulder and having given up the censer, he takes into his right hand the Diskos, upon which is the Asterisk and one veil, and into his left hand the Chalice covered with the lention and veil), chanting: “The Most Holy Universal Pontiff, [N.], our most faithful Sovereign, [N.], with all his court and his Christ-loving armed forces, our God-loving Bishop, [N.], and all the priestly and diaconal order, and the clerical rank; the blessed and ever-memorable founders and benefactors of this holy temple; and may the Lord God remember all you Orthodox Christians in His kingdom, always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages.” And having come before the Royal Doors, at the words: “and all you...” etc., he turns toward the people,

=== LEAF p213 ===
[Book Page 189]

but blesses them not; after this he turns again unto the holy Altar-Table and thus concludes this prayer. Meanwhile the deacon and subdeacon, having entered into the holy Sanctuary [Altar], await the priest on both sides within the holy doors. At the conclusion of this Great Entrance the choir saith “Amen,” and sings: “That we may receive the King of all, escorted invisibly by angelic ranks.*) Alleluia.”[^197],[^198]

Having entered***)[^199] within into the holy Sanctuary [Altar], the priest sets the holy Chalice upon the holy Altar-Table upon the Iliton on the right side, having removed from it the lention and having covered it with the smaller veil; and upon the left side he places the Diskos, having the Asterisk [Star] standing over the Lamb. Then, taking the Aer and having censed it, he covers therewith the presented gifts, saying: “The noble Joseph, taking down Thy most pure Body from the tree, wrapped it in clean linen with sweet spices, and laying it in a new tomb, closed it...” etc. After this, taking the censer from the deacon, he censes them thrice, saying: “Do good, O Lord, in Thy good pleasure unto Zion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be built...” etc.

The priest having thus placed the Holy Gifts, the deacon bows low before the most holy Altar-Table and goes forth through the northern door onto the ambo, and standing in the customary place, saith: “Let us complete our prayer unto the Lord,” etc.; while the priest quietly saith this litany at the holy Altar-Table, and concludes with the exclamation: “Through the compassions of Thine Only-begotten Son, with Whom Thou art blessed, together with Thine all-holy, good, and life-creating Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages,” unto which the choir answers: “Amen.”

When the Holy Gifts have been offered unto God in sacrifice, and when now the unbloody sacrifice of the New Testament itself is to be accomplished: the faithful are bound to prepare themselves for the accomplishment of this great Mystery, that this sacrifice may be pleasing unto God also with regard to the faithful. But since without faith it is impossible to please God, and faith without love is dead: therefore the faithful must manifest their love before the oblation of the sacrifice, and unanimously confess their faith.

=== LEAF p214 ===
[Book Page 190]

Unto the sign of that mutual love, the priest expresses it when after the exclamation: “Through the compassions” he saith unto the faithful the words: “Peace be unto all.” Unto this the choir answers: “And unto thy spirit.” After this the priest or deacon summons the faithful to manifest also by an outward sign their love, saying: “Let us love one another, that with one mind we may confess:”[^200] Unto this the choir answers: “The Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit: the Trinity, one in essence and undivided.” During this singing the priest kisses the Gifts covered with the Aer: first the top of the Diskos, then the top of the Chalice, thereafter the edge of the holy Altar-Table before him, saying at each kissing: “I will love Thee, O Lord, my strength; the Lord is my foundation and my refuge.”

After this kissing the priest or deacon exclaims: “The doors! The doors! In wisdom let us attend!”[^201] unto which the choir sings: “I believe.” And the priest, having raised the Aer with both hands, holds it over the Holy Gifts, reciting secretly the Confession of Faith. (If there is a deacon, he during this time opens the Royal Doors.) When the priest comes unto the words: “and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and Mary the Virgin,” he bows low; and upon the conclusion of the Symbol [Creed] he lowers the Aer, and having folded it in three parts, saith the Trisagion, and signing himself with the sign of the cross, kisses the Aer, and having folded it, places it upon the right side of the holy Altar-Table.

After the Confession of Faith, in order to make the faithful attentive unto the unbloody sacrifice, the deacon or priest exclaims: “Let us stand aright, let us stand with fear, let us attend, that we may offer the holy oblation in peace,” and immediately the deacon, having bowed, enters into the holy Sanctuary [Altar], and the priest exclaims, blessing the people: “The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all,” unto which the choir answers: “And with thy spirit.” After this the priest again admonishes the faithful to lay aside all earthly cares, saying: “Let us lift up our hearts,” lifting up together both his hands and his eyes, unto which the choir answers: “We lift them up unto the Lord.” After this the priest, having joined his outstretched hands at his breast and bowed his head, saith: “Let us give thanks unto the Lord,” and while the choir sings: “It is proper and right...” etc., he, with outstretched hands, reverently reads

=== LEAF p215 ===
[Book Page 191]

the prayer: “It is proper and right...” and pronounces only the conclusion of this prayer with a loud voice: “Singing the triumphant hymn, shouting, crying aloud, and saying:”[^202] and at these words takes the Asterisk [Star], and having bowed, strikes the four edges of the star upon the four sides of the Diskos, that is, depicts therewith upon the Diskos the image of the Holy Cross for a sign that the remembrance of Christ’s death upon the Cross draws near, and kisses it, and sets it aside.

When the choir sings the Angelic hymn, “Holy, Holy, Holy,” the priest—since he himself beforehand, having joined his hands at his breast, hath recited the hymn “Holy, Holy, Holy”—must renew with discernment and attentiveness the intention of his will toward the consecration of the Holy Mysteries, which he already formed at the Proskomedia, and that: briefly, quietly, in mind and not by words, saying: that he desires to consecrate the bread into the Body and the wine into the Blood; likewise he quietly repeats within himself for whom, or for what necessity, he desires to offer this sacrifice. And having awakened within himself perfect contrition and gathered all his thoughts, he outstretches his hands and with God-fearing attentiveness reads secretly this prayer: “With these blessed powers we also, O Master Who lovest mankind, cry aloud and say: Holy art Thou and all-holy, Thou and Thine Only-begotten Son, and Thy Holy Spirit...” etc.; and when he comes in this prayer unto the words: “taking bread,” he joins his hands; and after this takes the Diskos into his hands and lifts it up; and saying: “having given thanks,” he inclines his head, and makes with his right hand over the Diskos the sign of the cross, saying: “He † blessed, sanc † tified, and † broke, and gave unto His disciples, saying:” And immediately having bowed down, looking attentively upon the prepared bread, he pronounces the words that consecrate and transubstantiate the bread into the Body of Christ with a loud voice and distinctly: “Take, eat: this is My Body, which is broken for you for the remission of sins.” The choir: “Amen.” After this, having bowed low once, he uncovers the holy Chalice and, taking it with both hands, blesses it quietly, saying: “Likewise also the cup, † after supper, saying:” and immediately having bowed down and looking into the Chalice, he pronounces with a loud voice the words that consecrate and transubstantiate the wine into the Blood of Jesus Christ: “Drink of it, all of you: this is My Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you and for many for the remission

=== LEAF p216 ===
[Book Page 192]

of sins.” When the choir sings: “Amen,” the priest again bows low before the holy Blood of Christ once, and after this quietly saith: “Remembering therefore this saving commandment and all those things which came to pass for us: the Cross, the Grave, the Resurrection on the third day, the Ascension into heaven, the Sitting at the right hand, and the second and glorious Coming again...” etc. Upon the conclusion whereof, having crossed his hands crosswise, he then takes the Diskos into his right hand, and the Chalice into his left, and raises them up from the holy Altar-Table and sets them down upon the holy Altar-Table crosswise, saying: “Thine own of Thine own we offer unto Thee, in all and for all,” unto which the choir sings: “We sing unto Thee, we bless Thee, we give thanks unto Thee, O Lord, and we pray unto Thee, our God.”[^203]

After this the priest, having placed the Holy Mysteries in their place, bows low, and with outstretched hands secretly reads the prayer: “Furthermore we offer unto Thee this reasonable and unbloody service...” etc. Upon the conclusion of this prayer he saith thrice in a quiet voice: “O Lord, Who didst send down Thy Most Holy Spirit at the third hour upon Thine Apostles: take Him not away from us, O Good One, but renew Him in us who pray unto Thee,” with the verses, and after each time bows low; and at the end blesses the consecrated bread, saying: “And make this bread † the precious Body of Thy Christ”; and after this blesses the consecrated wine, saying: “And that which is in this cup, † the precious Blood of Thy Christ”; and after this, signing both with the cross, saith: “Changing them † by Thy Holy Spirit.” And having bowed profoundly, he covers the Chalice and continues the initial prayer: “That they may be unto them that partake for the purification of soul, for the remission of sins, for the communion of Thy Holy Spirit, for the fulfillment of the kingdom of heaven...” etc.[^204]

After this the priest, having commended all the faithful unto God’s grace, commemorates the individual members of the Church of Christ, and that first of all the members of the Church Triumphant (*Ecclesia triumphans*), with outstretched hands quietly saying: “Furthermore we offer unto Thee this reasonable service for those who have fallen asleep in the faith: Ancestors, Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Ascetics, and every righteous spirit made perfect in faith...” etc. But in this prayer, when he comes unto the commemoration of the Most Holy Theotokos, he takes the censer and censes the Holy Mysteries, continuing the initial prayer, saying with a loud voice: “Especially for our Most Holy, most pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary,” unto which the choir sings: “It is truly proper to bless thee, the Theotokos, ever-blessed and blameless, and the Mother of our God...” After this the priest outstretches his hands and continues the commemoration of the Saints, quietly saying: “For the holy Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist John,”

=== LEAF p217 ===
[Book Page 193]

etc. If there is a deacon, at “Especially” he opens the Royal Doors and censes the holy Altar-Table crosswise.

After this the priest, having invoked the Saints for their intercession, commemorates all the departed in the hope of resurrection (*Ecclesia patiens*), saying: “Remember, O Lord, the soul of Thy servant, [N.]...” etc., whereat he joins his hands, and quietly commemorates their names, and at the end outstretches his hands and concludes the commemoration of the departed with the words: “And make them to rest where the light of Thy countenance visits.”

After the commemoration of the dead follows the commemoration of the living (*Ecclesia militans*), quietly and with outstretched hands: “Furthermore we entreat Thee, remember, O Lord, all the episcopate of the Orthodox...” etc. Nevertheless, the commemoration of the supreme ecclesiastical hierarchs is made with a loud voice by this exclamation: “Among the first, remember, O Lord, the Most Holy Universal Pontiff, [N.], and our God-loving Bishop, [N.],” etc. After this exclamation, while the choir sings: “And all men and all women,” the priest, having his hands joined, continues the commemoration of the living whom he wishes, having commemorated also himself. At the end he outstretches his hands and quietly continues the commemorations, saying: “Remember, O Lord, this city wherein we dwell...” etc., and concludes with the exclamation: “And grant that with one mouth and one heart we may glorify and praise Thine all-honorable and majestic name, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages,”[^205] etc.

Having finished all these commemorations, he entreats God that the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, which flowed forth from His death upon the Cross as fruit, may be always with us, saying: “And may the mercies of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ be with you all.”

And hereby the core of the Divine Liturgy[^206] is concluded, that is, the oblation of the sacrifice, and now follows the preparation for Holy Communion.

At the exclamation: “And may the mercies...” the deacon closes the Royal Doors, and the subdeacon goes forth before the Royal Doors onto the ambo and chants the litany: “Having commemorated all the Saints, again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord...” etc., unto which the choir at each petition answers accordingly either “Lord, have mercy” (*Господи помилуй*) or “Grant this, O Lord.” The priest, having concluded the commemorations, quietly saith the litany and the prayer: “Unto Thee we commend our whole life and hope, O Master Who lovest mankind...” etc., and when the deacon concludes the litany, [the priest] with a loud voice pronounces

=== LEAF p218 ===
[Book Page 194]

the exclamation: “And make us worthy, O Master, that with boldness and without condemnation we may dare to call upon Thee, the heavenly God as Father, and to say:” etc., unto which the choir sings “Our Father.” During the singing thereof the priest, having his hands outstretched, likewise saith the Lord’s Prayer, but secretly—pronouncing with a loud voice only the exclamation: “For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages.” After this the priest greets the faithful with these words: “Peace be unto all.” Further he summons them, that in token of submission unto the Heavenly Father they should bow their heads, saying: “Bow your heads unto the Lord.” During the singing of “Unto Thee, O Lord,” the priest saith the prayer: “We give thanks unto Thee, O King invisible, Who by Thine immeasurable power hast created all things, and in the multitude of Thy mercy hast brought all things from nothing into being...” etc., and concludes with the exclamation, saying: “Through the grace and compassions and love for mankind of Thine Only-begotten Son, with Whom Thou art blessed, together with Thine all-holy, good, and life-creating Spirit, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.”

After this the priest, having bowed low before the Holy Mysteries, steps aside a little unto the right side, and washes the fingers of both hands, wherewith he is to touch the Most Holy Body of the Lord—and having wiped them, comes again unto the midst of the holy Altar-Table and bows low before the Holy Mysteries.

Having washed his hands and lifted up his eyes on high, he prays attentively and secretly: “Hear us, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, from Thy holy dwelling-place and from the throne of the glory of Thy kingdom...” etc., upon the conclusion of which prayer he saith thrice (striking his breast): “O God, be merciful unto me a sinner!”

The deacon (if there is one), while the priest saith the prayer: “Hear us, O Lord...” etc., comes from the ambo into the holy Sanctuary [Altar] and girds his orarion crosswise in order to manifest his reverence for the Holy Gifts in imitation of the Seraphim, who with wings cover their faces during the sacred action—and goes forth again before the Royal Doors onto the ambo. When he sees that the priest hath uncovered the holy Chalice, he bows low and exclaims: “Let us attend!” (*Во́ньмемъ*) and having entered into the holy Sanctuary [Altar], closes the Royal Doors. And the priest, having taken into his hands the Holy Lamb, elevating it over the Diskos, exclaims with a loud voice: “Holy things are for the holy!”[^207] unto which the choir sings: “One is holy, one is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen”; and the priest, having chanted “Holy things are for the holy,” bows low and breaks the Holy Lamb into four parts over the Diskos, saying: “Broken and divided is the Lamb of God, Which is broken and not divided, Which is ever eaten and never consumed, but sanctifies them that partake,” and places them upon the Diskos crosswise in token of the crucifixion of Christ upon the Cross—and that in such manner that he places the first part of the Holy Lamb with the letters “IC” above, “XC” below, “NI” on the left side, and “KA” on the right side. After this, having bowed low, he takes the first particle (that is, “IC”) with the first two fingers of both hands, moves it over the Chalice, and makes therewith the sign of the Holy

=== LEAF p219 ===
[Book Page 195]

Cross, and with the prayer: “The fullness of the Holy Spirit,”*) places it into the Chalice.[^208] And having covered the holy Chalice, he bows low. And immediately the fingers wherewith he broke the Holy Lamb he joins together, and until the washing of the holy Chalice holds them thus joined.

After this, having slightly inclined his head, he outstretches his hands and, looking reverently upon the Holy Mysteries, quietly prays: “I believe, O Lord, and I confess that Thou art truly the Christ, the Son of the living God, Who camest into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the first...” etc. Upon the conclusion of this prayer he bows low and, having taken the particle of the Lamb with the fingers of his right hand, saith: “The precious, most holy, and most pure Body of our Lord and God and Savior Jesus Christ is imparted unto me, [N.], priest, for the remission of my sins and unto life everlasting. Amen,” and having bowed down, receives communion over the Diskos with the particle “XC” of the Body of Christ with fear and attentiveness. (The remaining particles remain for those who receive communion.) After this, having joined his hands, he meditates a little upon the Holy Mysteries. And having uncovered the holy Chalice, he bows low and, taking the Diskos into his left hand, sweeps the remaining particles of the Holy Body carefully with the thumb of his right hand into the Chalice—and covers the Chalice with the lention. Then he takes the Chalice into his left hand, and the Diskos into his right hand, and places the Diskos under the Chalice and saith: “The precious, most holy, and most pure Blood of our Lord and God and Savior Jesus Christ is imparted unto me, [N.], priest, for the remission of my sins and unto life everlasting. Amen,” and receives communion of the Most Holy Blood once only, that is, he drinks of the Most Holy Blood only once, and with the lention wipes his lips. Having thus received communion, he sets the Chalice again upon the Iliton, and having joined his hands, kisses the edge of the holy Chalice, saying: “Behold, this hath touched my lips, and shall take away mine iniquities and cleanse my sins.” Afterwards he covers the Chalice with the lention and the veil, and bows low.[^209] While the communion of the priest takes place, the choir sings the Communion Hymn,***) of the day, or of the Sunday, or of the feast.[^210]

After this the priest takes the holy Chalice into his hands and turns toward the peo-

=== LEAF p220 ===
[Book Page 196]

-ple and exclaims:*) “With the fear of God and with faith draw near,”[^211] unto which the choir sings: “Blessed is He That comes in the name of the Lord; the Lord is God, and hath appeared unto us.”

(Here follows the communion of the laity, of which mention will be made in the III. Part.)

After “Blessed is He That comes,” the priest, holding in both hands the holy Chalice covered with the lention and veil, blesses the people with the Chalice, saying: “O God, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance.” Unto which the choir, confessing the benefits of the Savior, renders thanksgiving unto the Holy Trinity with the following hymn: “For many years, O Master. We have seen the true light, we have received the heavenly Spirit, we have found the true faith, worshiping the undivided Trinity: for the same hath saved us.” The priest at that time turns by that same side (that is, to the right) unto the holy Altar-Table, sets the holy Chalice upon the Iliton, and having bowed low thrice, saith: “Be Thou exalted above the heavens, O God, and Thy glory over all the earth,” and immediately takes the Chalice with both hands—and having placed all the veils and the Diskos and the Asterisk [Star] beneath the Chalice, makes the sign of the cross over the Altar-Table, saying: “Blessed is our God,” and turns toward the people and blesses the people with the holy Chalice, continuing with a loud voice the initial prayer: “always, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages.”[^212]

And immediately the priest carries the Holy Gifts unto the Table of Preparation [Prothesis],***)[^213] and the choir, having chanted “Amen,” glorifies and thanks the Lord with a hymn of praise: “May our mouths be filled with Thy praise, O Lord, that we may sing of Thy glory: for Thou hast made us worthy to partake of Thy holy, divine, immortal, and life-creating Mysteries...” etc. At the Table of Preparation [Prothesis] the priest places the Chalice in the midst, but the Aer with one veil, and the Diskos with the Asterisk [Star] on his left side, and uncovers the holy Chalice and bows low, and after this begins to consume the Holy Mysteries, but so that he places the Diskos—as before in the drinking—beneath the Chalice. After this, with wine which the deacon or server pours, he rinses the Chalice and drinks the purification; at the last, with wine and water he washes the Chalice and the fingers of both his hands, and having wiped them with the lention, drinks from the Chalice the wine and water remaining in the holy Chalice, that is, the ablution. And having wiped his mouth and the Chalice with the same lention, he folds the vessels, covers them with the veils and the Aer, saying within himself: “May our mouths be filled...” etc., and after this the litany: “Having received the divine, holy, immaculate, immortal, heavenly, and life-creating, awesome Mysteries of Christ, let us worthily give thanks unto the Lord...” etc.
